hey guys heidi preep here we talk a lot
on this channel about attachment styles
and i wanted to go over this week what
the main attachment styles look like a
lot of the language around attachment
styles online can feel very clinical and
very detached from the actual felt
experience of what it's like to be in
the shoes of any of these attachment
styles so this video is probably going
to be a little bit more personal and
less clinical than what you're used to
seeing on the internet around attachment
if you don't know what i'm talking about
when i say attachment styles i do have a
video on what the four attachment styles
are and those are anxious fearful
avoidant avoidant and secure on my
channel i'll link it in the description
of this video so you have a little bit
more context about what we're talking
about when we say terms like attachment
style but for the rest of you who are
already aware of what attachment styles
are let's dive into 10 signs that you
might have an anxious attachment style
sign number one that you might have an
anxious attachment style is one that i
think most anxiously attached people
feel on a very deep very visceral level
which is you are constantly trying to
feel good enough and what good enough
feels like is an ever-moving target so
if you follow brene brown at all she
talks about something called the hustle
for worthiness which is basically when
we are constantly measuring ourselves up
against these objective standards of
what a person who is worthy of love
would be like and always trying to move
closer and closer and closer to the
fulfillment of those standards and
people who have an anxious attachment
style tend to be incredibly aware of
those kind of perceived standards of
worthiness that they've decided or
internalized are what they have to work
for before someone is going to love them
before they're going to be good enough
or worthy of love
now when you have a secure attachment
style you know on a deep level that the
fact that you are alive and you are a
human being means that you are worthy or
already good enough for love right but
those of us who grew up with insecure
styles kind of internalized from a very
young age what we do and the way that we
show up or the way that we look or the
way that we present ourselves to other
people or what we can do for other
people are the things that make us
deserving of love and is this an
absolute lie that we are telling
ourselves yes but you don't know that if
you're anxiously attached it really
truly feels maybe because your early
experiences are that you could only get
warmth and affection and attention from
people through doing things for them
that you need to overextend yourself to
meet the needs of other people before
you're going to be deserving of love
yourself and so this ongoing hustle for
worthiness this ongoing moving target of
finally being good enough to be loved is
very very present in your awareness sign
number two that you might have an
anxious attachment style is that you are
an intimacy junkie so you love getting
to know people on a really deep level
and you tend to be frustrated by surface
level conversations so you might not be
a very big fan of small talk or you
might be fine with it for a bit but then
you really want to get into like the
meat and potatoes of a conversation with
someone because it actually can feel
stressful for you to not understand
someone's motivations because when
you're a young child as an anxiously
attached person
usually you're dealing with an
inconsistent emotional environment which
means your family members your parents
your caregivers may have been responsive
to your needs only sometimes so you had
to kind of learn via really
understanding other people when and why
and where your needs are going to get
met and so your first instinct when you
meet new people is to get to know them
really really well so that you
understand what to expect from them now
that isn't necessarily going to be
what's conscious for you what's
conscious for you is just feeling like i
am fascinated by people i love getting
to know new people and i really want to
get to know the people in my life really
deeply and really well and it can
actually feel stressful for you if
someone doesn't want to go deep with you
if someone does want to keep things on
the surface but that's someone who you
feel is important to you especially if
this is someone who is your partner so
generally when you're forming a romantic
relationship you're always pushing for
more closeness more intimacy to go
deeper and deeper with your partner and
that need intensifies the more your
partner pulls away or resists because it
kind of feels like well what are you
hiding from me so often if you have an
anxious attachment style you have this
feeling that you want to get closer to
your partners then maybe they want to
get to you and this is in large part
because you tend to go after partners
who have avoidant attachment styles
which is something we're going to talk a
lot more about in future videos but for
now what you need to know is that that
feeling of being kind of an intimacy
junkie of wanting to merge with someone
else and really kind of lose yourself in
the exploration of someone else might
actually be a really key indicator that
you have an anxious attachment style
sign number three that you might have an
anxious attachment style and we did just
talk about this one a little bit but
feeling like you are always a little bit
more committed in your relationships
than the partners that you seek out or
maybe like you're always the one who's
kind of showing up and doing more and
loving more like that identity i think
of i'm always the one who loves more is
one that we see a lot with anxious
attachment and there are a couple of
reasons why this happens again one
reason is because you tend to mistake
people who are completely emotionally
stoic as people who are emotionally
mature and so you might end up chasing
people who have an avoidant attachment
style where they actually really
struggle to open up and to share their
emotions and to make commitments in
relationships and so you might find that
you're constantly drawn to people who
don't want the same depth and breadth of
relationship as you do but another
reason you might feel this way is
because whether you're aware of this or
not you tend to focus more on your
emotions and your relationships than the
average person including securely
attached people so because more of your
conscious attention is focused on okay
how does our relationship feel how are
we relating to each other where are we
going in the future it can feel
difficult to kind of back off and just
relax and let things play out as they'll
play out because there often is that
sense of kind of pervasive anxiety you
are much more motivated than the average
person to constantly be working on the
relationship it would be kind of like if
you had no place to live you would be
frantically trying to build a house all
of the time as soon as the tools were
available to you right and the same can
be said for when you don't have a strong
sense of self-love and a lot of your
self-esteem needs are being met by other
people as soon as you have someone who
you feel like is making you feel good
about yourself you might start to feel
that frantic feeling of like okay well
now i have to work on this all the time
i have to quickly construct this house
if you will the house being the
relationship because it is meeting so
many of these needs that i have not had
met for a very long time so you can have
this kind of obsessive focus on the
relationship that might feel like you're
loving more but what's actually
happening is that you are loving more
obsessively right whereas someone else
who has more of their self-esteem needs
met on a base level and who doesn't
necessarily feel that same need to kind
of hustle for worthiness in the same way
might feel like we can build this house
very slowly you know
because i have somewhere else to stay in
the meantime which is to say they're a
little bit more comfortable in their
skin when they're alone but all of that
is getting ahead of ourselves for now
what you need to know is that if you
have an anxious attachment style it will
often feel like you are giving more or
loving harder than other people in your
relationships but it's actually because
you're coming into the relationship with
different needs and this kind of leads
us to point number four which is that
early on in relationships you tend to
suppress your true wants and needs in
order to avoid being abandoned so early
on you might just be really focused on
what someone who you're attracted to
might want in a partner and you'll kind
of make this deal with yourself where
it's like well i can just kind of be
that person for them right because if
they see that i'm actually another way
they're going to abandon me they're not
going to want to be with me so your
strategy unconsciously or consciously
can be be whoever that person wants me
to be until i've got them and then i'll
bring up my needs and at that point a
lot of conflict might start in the
relationship because these needs that
you unconsciously suppressed early on
because the thing that was the most
present in your mind was that hustle for
worthiness are now front and center and
now there's maybe conflicting interests
because your partner wasn't aware that
you wanted those things maybe you even
said i don't want those things early on
because you were so focused on getting
that person's love and affection and
attention that it really felt like oh i
could do without those things and then
long term you realize you can't but this
is a very common pattern that we see
with anxious attachment in relationships
is the early suppression of their own
needs because it just feels so
viscerally important in the moment to
get that other person's approval but
that really does need to be brought to
the surface in a much more conscious way
if you want to be able to start healing
your attachment style and having
healthier relationships sign number five
that you might have an anxious
attachment style is that the
conversations that you have whether it
is with your friends with your family
with people at your work whether it is
the conversations you have with yourself
inside of your own head tend to rotate
around relationships so they call the
anxious type the anxious preoccupied
type because by definition there is kind
of a preoccupation
with emotions and with relationships and
this is different than just having
emotions and relationships be a part of
your everyday life so the secure person
absolutely thinks about their
relationships thinks about their
feelings but they probably have about an
equal amount of thoughts when it comes
to the logistics of their life their
work the other activities they're a part
of their emotions and their
relationships are a part of their life
not the main focus of their life but
when you have an anxious attachment
style relationships can be completely
overwhelming it can be particularly
difficult to detach from thinking about
relationships if you're in any sort of
distress interpersonally so if you're
having a fight with your partner for
example it can be really difficult for
you to put the conflict down for a
little bit and let's say go to work or
go about your daily routine and then
come back to it at a later time strong
emotions especially strong emotions that
are related to someone who you feel
attached to
are so present and front and center for
you in your mind that it can be very
difficult for you to focus on other
things if there's any sort of emotional
challenges going on for you so you tend
to talk and think quite a bit about
personal relationships which leads us
kind of naturally to point number six
that you might have an anxious
attachment style which is that when you
are in a relationship you tend to
overthink or even obsess a little bit
over what your partner is thinking and
feeling so you do have again that kind
of persistent sense of anxiety that your
partner might be planning to leave you
that maybe they're not as interested in
you as you are to them so you might be
prone to over interpreting things like
them taking a little bit longer than
usual to text back or them forming a new
friend who you might be worried that
they're attracted to and again there's a
reason why you are so tuned into these
things it's because as a very young
child you had to adapt to an
unpredictable environment so you learned
to be a little bit of a detective and to
constantly look for clues about what was
going on with other people assuming that
those people were not being direct with
you and sometimes as an adult you
recreate this dynamic by choosing
partners who are a little bit less
emotionally available and who aren't
necessarily direct with you about what
they're feeling and so then you will put
your detective skills to work and become
very preoccupied with trying to figure
out what your partner is thinking or
feeling and so once again taking it back
to the last point you might find
yourself going to friends quite a bit
and going what do you think is going on
with my partner because you aren't
having those direct conversations with
your partner because you tend to chase
people who are emotionally unavailable
and who aren't that direct with you so
it ends up being this kind of
never-ending cycle of you constantly
trying to decipher what's going on and
feeling quite insecure in your
relationship because you have learned to
expect the worst and so you're
constantly on guard for it happening
sign number seven that you might have an
anxious attachment style is that when
you are single or on your own for a
significant period of time you tend to
sustain yourself through fantasies
so a lot of attachment literature will
say that anxiously attached people are
never single they're never on their own
they never stop and self-regulate and do
their own thing and that is absolutely
false in fact i think that because the
anxious attachment style can be
so overwhelmed and so conscious of the
fact that relationships take up such a
huge amount of space in their brain they
can often be the ones who are
consciously choosing to take a break
from relationships and to be on their
own for a little bit before going back
into relationships and that can be a
great thing however it's important that
during these periods you're making sure
you're actually doing the work of
becoming more independent and
self-sufficient because the danger is
that you might just use that time to
dissociate into fantasy so anxiously
attached people tend to have fantasies
at every stage of the relationship
including when they are out of
relationships because from a very young
age that was how you learned to comfort
yourself when your attachment needs were
not being met is to think about a
beautiful perfect loving relationship
where all of your needs were being met
and to spend a lot of time imagining
yourself being in that relationship and
so as an adult when your attachment
needs are not being met you are at very
high risk of spending a large amount of
time playing out these kind of movies
inside of your mind where you are with
this idealized partner and all of your
problems are gone and someone has saved
you from your life and from your misery
and living this way is really not
healing your attachment wounding any
more than being in the wrong partnership
is because in both situations you're not
dealing with reality
but we're going to talk a lot more about
how to work with your fantasies in a
healthy way as well as how to take
healthy alone time if you're anxiously
attached in future videos but for now i
just want to bring up the fact that if
when you are either single or when you
are feeling distant from your partner
you kind of bridge that gap with a
fantasy world inside of your head that
is a very strong sign that you might
have an anxious attachment style sign
number eight that you might have an
anxious attachment style is that you
struggle to set boundaries and keep them
because you're afraid that they're going
to drive people away so this is very
similar to that problem of early on in a
relationship suppressing your needs
because you're afraid that if you show
your needs someone else is going to get
out of there and the reason why so many
anxiously attached people really
struggle with boundaries is not because
you don't necessarily know where your
boundaries should be it's because you
are afraid that having a boundary means
someone else is going to choose to walk
away and because you really do rely on
other people in many ways to help you
stay emotionally regulated and it feels
very very terrifying to think about
losing someone who you're closely
connected to you are often willing to do
away with your boundary and not stand by
it in order to keep that person in your
life and this is not to say that you
have to compromise your boundaries to
keep people in your life but often
that's what it viscerally feels like is
going to happen right so more often than
not it's not that you don't know how to
set a boundary it's that you don't know
how to stand by it and you don't know
how to keep it because what you want
which is co-regulation and closeness all
of the time is on the other side of your
boundary and this is something that we
talk a lot about in my video called the
four attachment styles and boundaries
which i will also link in the
description of this video because it
gives a lot of important information
about how to set and keep your
boundaries as an anxiously attached
person but for now what you need to know
is that if you really struggle to stand
behind the boundaries you set because
you have a visceral fear that you're
going to be abandoned if you keep that
boundary that is a very strong sign that
you might have an anxious attachment
style sign number nine that you might
have an anxious attachment style is that
you are constantly putting people on
pedestals and then getting frustrated
when they don't live up to that ideal
because anxiously attached people have
what we call a negative view of self
positive view of others you might have a
tendency to idealize or only look at the
positive traits of someone else and you
might think of that as seeing the best
in someone but what it actually is is
going a little bit into that fantasy
right of that perfect or idealized
person who can meet all of your needs
and of course no one person can meet all
of your needs no one person is perfect
and no one person even knows exactly
what your needs are until you
communicate them clearly and
articulately to them right
so there is often an ongoing frustration
especially when someone with an anxious
attachment style is not aware of their
attachment style where they are pinning
these positive qualities onto their
partners and then getting frustrated
when their partner shows them a part of
themselves that they didn't dream them
to be right so maybe you are chasing a
partner who's a little bit more reserved
but you're imagining them to have a
really rich and deep inner emotional
world that they'll eventually open up
and share with you and then the deeper
you get into the relationship and the
more you find out that maybe they don't
have a really rich deep emotional world
the same way that you do that might be
really frustrating to you and you might
feel like well where is it i know it's
in there not realizing that you kind of
imagined that or you might have
misinterpreted some of the things that
they said to believe that it meant a
certain thing about them but really what
you should have been doing was asking
them and checking in with them about
their inner experience
but again it's hard because all of this
happens very unconsciously and as you go
about your attachment healing journey
you have to be very conscientious about
rooting out what did someone actually
tell me or show me about themselves
versus what did i imagine for them and
in which cases is my disappointment
stemming from that idealized version of
them not being the reality sign number
10 that you might have an anxious
attachment style is that you spend more
time thinking about what other people
think of you than thinking of what you
think of you
okay so i'm going to say that again you
might be consciously much more focused
on other people's opinions of you than
you are on your own sense of self and
figuring out for yourself what kind of a
person you are and whether or not you're
proud of that person so when you have an
anxious attachment style
self-improvement often looks like in
your eyes becoming someone who other
people will approve of more and more but
what self-improvement should be
is you becoming a person who feels more
calm and secure in your relationship
with yourself right
that's the really deep attachment work
but because you've been conditioned for
so long to get your needs met externally
you can have this experience of being
hyper focused on what other people want
you to be and that experience can
actually feel stronger and more real
than the feeling of what you want for
yourself which is something that you
don't necessarily tune into as much as
you might think you do and that
experience is something that we're going
to talk a lot more about as we get into
the process of healing attachment styles
and working with your attachment style
in order to feel both more comfortable
in your own skin and also more
comfortable relating easily to others
but for now i just wanted to go over
some of the key signs that might
indicate you have an anxious attachment
style let me know in the comments what
in this video may have resonated for you
guys and if you already identified as
having an anxious attachment style i'm
also curious about what it was that
helped you clue into that fact and that
helped you recognize yourself in the
anxious attachment style so let me know
your thoughts below as always i love you
guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again soon
[Music]
you