guys Heidi prep here welcome back to my
Channel today we are talking about
on-again off-again relationships and
what that's like from the perspective of
an anxiously attached person or someone
using anxious attachment strategies
so last week I put out a video about
fearful avoidance and the tendency to
have on-again off-again relationships
but I definitely don't think that that
tendency is exclusive to fearful
avoidance I think that anyone who is
insecurely attached is familiar with the
on-again off-again game and usually the
reason why they're familiar with that
game is because in insecure attachment
relationships so relationships that are
comprised of two people who have
anything but a secure attachment style
you tend to have one person who is more
anxious and one person who is more
avoidant or if you have let's say two
people who are fearful avoidant one will
take on the more anxious role and one
will take on the more avoidant role and
the problem is that when you have an
anxious avoidant relationship in any
capacity both people tend to struggle
with stating their needs and wants
explicitly and clearly as well as
stating their boundaries explicitly and
clearly so what often happened is that
there is a lot of things that go unsaid
in these Dynamics you might have one
person who fawns over the other when
they're feeling stressed or disregulated
and you might have another who pulls
away when they're feeling dysregulated
and what happens when we're chronically
operating from that fight flight freezer
Fawn system is that it feels really
difficult to tune in and figure out what
we actually need in Partnerships what
our wants are what our needs are what
our mutual future plans are so what
often happens is that all of these unmet
needs all of these unspoken expectations
all of these boundaries that are not
being set or not being followed in these
relationships lead to premature breakups
so the couple might not necessarily be
ready to break up they might still have
feelings for each other but because
there isn't the proper communication and
the proper self-regulation skills on
behalf of both parties usually to work
through conflict in a productive way
instead usually the more avoidant
leaning person but it could be either
will initiate a breakup when things
start to feel overwhelming however if
that breakup is initiated at a point in
the relationship where both people still
have feelings for each other or there is
a lot of unfinished business it's not
uncommon for insecurely attached couples
to gravitate back towards each other and
to give the dynamic another shot now if
you are the anxious leaning individual
in this Dynamic it's more likely again
not necessarily guaranteed to be the
case but more likely that you were not
the one who initiated the breakup often
it is avoidant-leaning people who are
more likely to initiate premature
breakups because their attachment system
gets very overwhelmed at the thought of
needing to set boundaries at the thought
of needing to meet other people's needs
at the thought of feeling incompetent in
their own ability to either set
boundaries or meet another person's
needs or realistically find the balance
between those two so you're likely to
see the avoid leaning person pulling
back and the anxious leaning person not
wanting that to happen the more anxious
leaning person is more likely to be the
one who advocates for the relationship
to continue and to be more willing to
jump back into the dynamic at a future
point in time should the avoidant
Leaning person show interest in doing
that but what I want to use this video
to do is to encourage you to take a
pause if you are the anxious leaning
person in an on-again off-again Dynamic
before going right back into the same
relationship and really figure out is
this right for me
is this relationship meeting my needs
and if not am I only going back into it
to avoid being alone and learning to
meet my own needs because at the end of
the day we can heal in or out of
relationships but if we are using
relationships as a Band-Aid to meet our
own needs and as a way of avoiding doing
that for ourselves we're going to end up
in the same Cycles over and over and
over again right so this video is not
about encouraging you not to go back to
an ex-partner but it is about learning
to do so consciously if that's the
choice you make and learning which
issues you're going to have to work
through and overcome both as a couple
and individually in order for that
Getting Back Together process to
properly work so these are five
questions I encourage you to ask
yourself and really sit with and spend
some time on if you're considering
getting back together with an ex and you
identify as having an anxious attachment
Style
so question one and this is the most
important question for both of you to
ask yourselves and each other is what
led to the last breakup and is that
issue now resolved or do we have a
different strategy for handling that
problem going forward
so if the last breakup happened because
let's say your ex was feeling
overwhelmed and they pulled back and
they were unable to communicate their
boundaries or their needs or you were
trying to manipulate or get your needs
met covertly without explicitly stating
what they were
is that not a problem anymore have one
or both of you learned new communication
skills are you able to sit down now and
talk openly about what went wrong the
last time and how you're going to tackle
that problem differently in the future
and if you are able to sit down and have
that conversation are you satisfied with
the solutions that you come up with
do you feel like you're both
participating equally in that discussion
and that you're both ready to do the
work for you it's probably going to be
around self-regulation and learning to
meet more of your own needs and for the
more avoidant leaning person it's likely
going to be around speaking up more and
communicating clearly about what their
boundaries are but it could be a range
of things right no two relationships are
the same and there's going to be
different challenges and different
things that every couple experiences
completely uniquely but before choosing
to re-enter a relationship Dynamic you
really want to make sure you're clear on
what it was that didn't work the first
time around and you want to make sure
there's an answer that both of you are
clear on and satisfied with about what's
going to be different this time around
because otherwise you are setting
yourself up to go right back into the
same cycle and experience that same pain
all over again question two to ask
yourself before getting back together
with an ex is is this in any way an act
of self-abandonment so what I mean by
that is are you leaving any part of your
true self at the door in order to get
back into this relationship
are there needs that you know were not
met in this relationship and you know
you're not going to feel comfortable
advocating for yourself and speaking up
for yourself for this time around are
there trauma responses or attachment
wounds that tend to get really activated
in this relationship that you've not yet
found ways to self-regulate around and
again it's not to say that none of this
stuff can be worked through in
relationship but if you don't have a
plan to work through those things in the
relationship is it all that kind to
yourself to go back into this Dynamic
knowing you'll be putting yourself in an
emotional Firing Line and that doesn't
necessarily mean by the way that it's
your partner doing that emotional firing
a lot of the time when we choose to go
into dynamics that we know trigger us
and we don't have strategies around
dealing with our own triggers it's like
we're putting ourselves in our own
Firing Line right and sometimes to
visualize this more clearly I like to
ask myself if I had a a four-year-old
daughter
or a very young child I was responsible
for taking care of would I let this
daughter go live with this person who
I'm thinking of entering into a
relationship with and if so what
protective measures would I need to make
sure I had in place to take care of this
child even when things get difficult
even when that partner is not available
for a period of time even when we are
fighting right what resources do I have
that I can draw from to keep my inner
child safe in this dynamic and if the
answer is I would not allow a
four-year-old anywhere near a person
like this or a dynamic like this that's
probably a pretty good indication that
you are failing to protect the more
vulnerable parts of yourself by entering
into this Dynamic that you have not yet
developed the inner parenting skills you
need to be able to navigate that Dynamic
clearly your inner child wants to be
their full authentic selves everywhere
they go and it's your responsibility to
make sure you are setting up a safe
environment for them to do that right so
if you know that you are entering into a
relationship where you choose to hide
parts of yourself where you choose to
compartmentalize yourself where you
choose to present a version of yourself
that is not the true and whole version
of yourself because you think that the
true and whole version of yourself
wouldn't be accepted or would cause the
relationship to break down that is an
act of violence against your inner child
you are telling the vulnerable most in
need part of yourself you don't matter
to me I am going to sell you out so that
I can get this other person's approval
and that is going to read absolute havoc
on your self-esteem long term right the
relationship that you need to protect
above and beyond any other relationship
in the world is your relationship with
yourself and that vulnerable child
inside of you so ask yourself can I have
and maintain and preserve a really
healthy relationship with my own inner
child while in this relationship or am I
going to be that parent who tells the
child you need to shut up and do what
you're told so that mommy or daddy can
get what they want and really notice
what message you're sending to yourself
if that's what you choose question three
to ask yourself before going back into a
relationship with an ex is am I implying
or promising anything that I know I
can't deliver on
so there is a tendency and I'd imagine
this is especially the case for those on
the anxious attachment Spectrum to be on
their absolute best behavior when
they're thinking about getting back into
a relationship with someone so let's say
you know that in some ways you crossed
your ex-partner's boundary maybe you
invaded their privacy in some way maybe
you became a little bit controlling and
started wanting them to respond to you
in highly specific ways that were not
authentic for them and didn't give them
the room they needed to be who they were
maybe you were making accusations about
them or placing expectations on them
that you know they were not willing or
able to meet
and going back into this Dynamic I think
we always kind of know in our guts when
we're lying a little bit to get what we
want
and I think it's really important to
take a moment or 12 and really ask
yourself am I right now being on my best
behavior but do I know because I know
myself that when I get back into this
Dynamic and my wounds are triggered
again I'm gonna resort to the same old
tactics of trying to keep someone close
without being clear and precise about
what I need and what my boundaries are
am I saying yes it's fine that you need
tons of space I can totally do that for
you and totally allow that in our
relationship because you're desperate to
get back into the relationship but you
know that six months a year down the
line when they're taking the amount of
space that they needed the last time
around particularly near the end it's
not going to work for you are you making
any promises that in any place in your
gut you know you're probably not going
to be able to keep are you acting in
ways that you know you probably are not
going to continue to act once the
dynamic gets back into the swing of
things and those wounds are coming up
and those fears are coming up and those
anxieties are coming up so are you
making any false promises to this other
person about the ways in which you plan
to behave this time around and if so are
you recognizing that that is a boundary
violation and that you are heading into
a relationship on dishonest grounds and
potentially wasting years of someone
else's life in the process now this
doesn't mean that the needs you have are
unreasonable right maybe your partner
truly is just not able to meet you in
the place that you need to be in in
order for a relationship to work maybe
they just truly are not the right fit in
that way right but there can often be
this kind of idea in the minds of those
who lean a bit more anxious that that if
my demands and if what I want are
reasonable then the other person should
or has to give me those things and I
deserve to advocate for those things and
I deserve to demand that they're given
to me but at the end of the day you're
making the choice about who you're in a
relationship with right
so if the person that you are choosing
to be with does not want to meet you
there it is not your right to have them
meet you there right it is your right to
walk away and find someone who's willing
to meet you there or if you find that
there's a pattern of your needs not
being met it might be time to re-examine
whether you are coming into romantic
relationships with the appropriate level
of Independence or the appropriate level
of self-regulation or the appropriate
level of leaning on your partner versus
leaning on friends and Community for
support right so you just want to make
sure that if you are going back into
this Dynamic you are not doing it under
any false pretenses
and I think we always know in our gut
when we're doing that I have
unquestionably done this right you want
to get your foot in the door you just
maybe feel desperate to have that
person's love and attention and
affection back but you kind of know
inside of yourself and the part of you
where you're honest with yourself that
as soon as your foot is back in that
door you're gonna crack it open wider
and wider and wider and six months later
you're going to be exactly back where
you started so really try to sit with
yourself and ask yourself that question
with honesty and do yourself the favor
of deeply examining whether or not you
want to go back into a dynamic where you
know you are potentially going to resort
to Old unhealthy coping mechanisms is
that the healthiest thing for you and is
it respectful of the other person's time
and autonomy question four to ask
yourself before going back into a
relationship with an ex as an anxiously
attached person am I fulfilled outside
of this relationship and if not am I
looking for this relationship to fill
some sort of hole that I have in another
area of my life so this is a
particularly important one to ask
yourself if you were the one who broke
off the relationship the last time
around I think it's not uncommon for
those of us who are insecurely attached
to have this idea in our heads that if
this relationship doesn't meet my needs
then I have to go find a different
relationship that does and then if you
let's say try out a few more
relationships and they also don't meet
your needs there can be this idea of
well I might as well go back to the best
I've found so far right not realizing
that the best you've found so far is not
the best you're ever going to find and
sometimes the reason you're not finding
better is because you haven't really
taken the time to build up a life that
you're satisfied with outside of the
relationship right and the reason that
these relationships are repeatedly going
wrong might be because you are looking
at them as a means of fulfilling
something in your life that you actually
can't get out of a relationship that
maybe you can only get out of having a
meaningful career that you love that you
can maybe only get out of having a deep
fulfilling sense of Independence and
autonomy and empowerment in your life
that you can maybe really only get out
of having deep honest authentic
connected Community relationships and
until you have those things outside of a
relationship it's going to be really
difficult to thrive within one because
you might be putting undue pressure on
the relationship itself
so this is an important one really spend
some time with it ask yourself am I
going back to this because I don't know
how to meet needs Within Myself or am I
going back to this because I'm pretty
happy and satisfied with my life and now
I truly see this person as someone who I
could have a healthy partnership with
and who I could do life side by side
with does not mean getting back together
and filling these giant emotional holes
we have inside of each other with a
partner it means will my life be more or
less the same with this person they'll
just be around more and add some things
to a life that is already pretty good
and pretty fulfilling if so that's a
pretty good green flag that maybe it is
time to get back together maybe you
really have done that work but if the
answer is and again you need to be
really honest with yourself here no I'm
not coping very well on my own and this
person looks like a life raft in the sea
that I'm drowning in that isn't
necessarily the best motivation to get
back together right this is one of the
situations where the metaphors sink or
swim applies really aptly right
sometimes we have to put ourselves in
those positions where we don't have a
safety net we don't have a person to run
back to we don't have a fallback in
order to not fall back
right in order to actually learn to swim
and to build the skills that we have
been Outsourcing probably for a long
time maybe this is your opportunity
right question number five to ask
yourself do I deeply understand how and
why things are going to be better this
time around so those with an anxious
attachment wound tend to have something
called a magical future fantasy which
means there can be this process of kind
of dissociating into the fantasy of a
magical future where everything is
working out and there are no problems
and you and your partner are super happy
together maybe you have a family maybe
you are traveling to Exotic destinations
together but not really having a
step-by-step plan of how to get there so
when you think about your future with
your partner instead of just slipping
into this beautiful fantasy which is
very tempting right really sit down and
think what steps does it take to get
from where we are right now to that
place and you really have to look at at
what problems are in the way if you
really struggle to resolve conflict it's
unlikely that in five years you're going
to be having an idyllic family situation
it's likely that in five years you're
still going to be having a ton of
conflict and now maybe your kids are
going to be in the mix so you need to
look at what needs to tangibly happen
and how you can take steps starting
today towards that happening in order to
build yourself into the place where that
future actually has a ground under it so
this means you need to be able to look
at things realistically point out and
name where the problems are and then
figure out are we both on the same page
when it comes to working our way through
these problems when I bring these things
up when I bring these steps that we
would need to take to get to where I
want to go to up with my partner are
they happy to work on those things with
me do they share that vision of a future
and are we able to talk openly about
whether or not we can take the steps
together to get there and if the answer
to any of that is no then it's possible
you're actually taking steps further and
further and further away from that
fantasy because it's like you're just
driving in the opposite direction right
the further you go down a road with
someone who isn't willing or wanting to
work with you in the direction of the
plans and goals that you have for the
future the more time you are wasting
both yourself and someone else's the
more energy and emotion you are
investing in a situation that isn't
necessarily bringing you closer to where
you want to go and look I'm not saying
that every relationship has to have the
end figured out right at the beginning
right in a healthy and secure
partnership you figure a lot of that
stuff out as you go and in context so
you figure out the next step based on
what makes sense for the step that
you're on but you have to make sure that
you're both clear about which Step
you're on from the get-go which problems
do you have right now how are you going
to work on those right now and then what
are you wanting to work towards or build
on after that problem gets resolved and
if you don't have the answer to this it
might also be worth spending some time
with yourself and really figuring out
what are my partnership goals what does
a healthy happy communicative
relationship look like to me and what's
been the thing that's in the way of that
for me in the past and you don't get to
take the easy way out here and say all
of my past partners have been
narcissists okay so the problem in the
way is that you are very attracted to
narcissistic partners and that's the
thing you need to fix before going into
the next partnership right how do you
recognize the green flags of an
emotionally available person and how do
you develop the communication skills
that will allow you to stay in a
partnership with an emotionally
available person so before going back
into a relationship with someone you've
already tried things with make sure
you're really thinking about what type
of future you're trying to build and
what the realistic steps are for getting
there and is this person a good
companion on that Journey for you or do
they have a totally different vision of
the future nobody owes anybody a certain
type of relationship relationships are
negotiated openly between people and so
if this person can't give you what you
feel like you deserve consider finding
someone who has more similar standards
for what you think that romantic
Partners owe each other right there's no
right or wrong here there is just what
everyone is willing to agree to so make
sure if you are thinking of getting back
together with an X make sure that you're
entering back into the dynamic with
clear and explicit agreements about the
things that really matter to you rather
than dissociating from those things
telling yourself you'll figure it out
later and letting your inner child just
flail around panicking and full of
anxiety with every passing day that goes
by when you are not listening to what he
or she wants alright that's all I've got
for today on things you should consider
and spend some time with yourself asking
yourself before getting back together
with an ex if you identify as someone
who uses anxious attaching strategies
let me know in the comments if this is a
situation you have found yourself in
over the years if you are chronically in
and out of on-again off-again
relationships or if that hasn't really
been a challenge for you and if it has
been a challenge which strategies or
which questions have you asked yourself
that have helped you to lessen that
Dynamic and helped you find more
satisfaction in the relationships that
you're in or more satisfaction with your
life outside of relationships as always
I love you guys I hope you're taking
care of yourselves and your inner
children and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]
thank you
[Music]