hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about neuroticism and today in
particular I want to talk about a
neurotic Dynamic that tends to underly
anxious avoidant relationship Dynamics
so anxious avoidant relationships are
essentially any relationship where one
partner has and is expressing more
anxious attachment wounds and the other
partner has or is expressing more avoid
ID attachment wounds and very often when
we get into these relationships what it
feels like is we just can't seem to find
Common Ground we just can't seem to make
sense of why these conflicts go on and
on and don't get resolved why it feels
like we're not seeing eye to eye and
what I want to talk about today is the
underlying reason why that often is so
anytime we are having an argument we are
generally having a couple arguments at
once one is the kind of top layer
surface level argument so you didn't do
the dishes or you never text me back on
time or I know you don't like your
sister-in-law just admit it to me I
already know it when in reality we're
having a conflict that's actually a lot
deeper than that under the surface now
what's distinct between anxious avoidant
or insecurely attached Dynamics and
secure Dynamics is that in Secure
Dynamics what's under the surface is
generally not that deeply obscured from
the people having the argument so
securely attached people tend to have
less blind spots that are guiding their
behavior and causing them to go into
conflict somewhat blind to their true
intentions whereas when you have anxious
avoidant couples or mutually insecurely
attached couples of any attachment
orientation what often happens is you
have two people who are very frequently
arguing from their unconscious blind
spots so what they're saying the problem
is is truly consciously what they
believe the problem is but there's very
often a deeper subconscious wound that's
being expressed or that's being avoided
through the argument that's more
indicative of the real reason why
they're in Conflict so today what we're
going to talk about is how to start
becoming more aware of what it is that
you're actually arguing about if you're
in one of these anxious avoidant or
insecurely attached relations ships as
well as how we can start moving to a
more secure style of conflict so very
often what I believe is going on under
the surface of these anxious avoidant
Dynamics is that there's a fundamental
mismatch in each party's premise about
what the relationship is and what
purpose they want it to serve in their
lives but very often both people in the
partnership have the same conscious or
explicit relationship intention so they
might both come in going yeah I want a
partner to spend my life with and they
might think that they're aligned on what
it is they're looking for in a
relationship when in reality these
unconscious wounds are actually driving
them to look at the relationship very
differently and the problem is that when
we're triggered when we are in Conflict
when we are under threat those
unconscious wounds start arguing on our
behalf so we are no longer operating
from the rational part of our brains
that no knows consciously and explicitly
what we want out of our Partnerships
we're now arguing from the part of
ourselves that has partnership as a
concept represented in a way that is
actually quite different from our
conscious or explicitly stated views of
what a partnership is and what role we
want it to fill in our lives so if
you're insecurely attached it's highly
likely that your own conscious and
unconscious ideas about what you want
out of your relationship Are Not Alone
mind and then when you get into conflict
with your partner if you're both
insecurely attached you're probably
arguing unconscious to unconscious
rather than conscious integrated mind to
conscious integrated mind in a
relationship where two people are
securely attached the premise is
generally I know who I am I know what
matters to me and what my priorities are
and I want to find someone whose company
I enjoy and who has similar values and
priorities to me so that we can make a
life work together long term and this is
both their explicit conscious premise
for the relationship but also their
implicit unconscious premise because
when we're raised securely attached we
learn to prioritize both how we feel
about people when we're getting close to
them in relationships as well as the
Practical aspects of how a life with
them would function however when we are
insecurely attached we unconsciously
tend to learn to prioritize only one of
those two things so those who air more
anxiously attached tend to place a very
high value on how they feel in the
presence of their partner they want to
feel secure cared about loved cherished
but they're not always particularly
practical about making sure that their
partner fits the criteria that it would
be logical for them to look for in a
partner for example you often have
people who are anxiously attached saying
they want a committed long-term
respectful relationship explicitly but
then they go ahead and choose partner
after partner who is completely
emotionally unavailable and this is not
particularly logical right so a securely
attached person if they met someone they
really liked and enjoyed being around
but they could tell that that person
didn't really have the communication
skills the desire to commit to something
long term for the capacity to be
vulnerable and open with them they
probably wouldn't consider that person a
good match for a long-term partnership
they might keep them as a friend instead
and on the flip side of things you often
have people with avoidant attachment
Styles looking at The Logical criteria
around who would fit inside of the lives
that they've created for themselves but
not paying all that much attention to
the vulnerability and the emotional
availability that needs to be present
for them in order to make a partnership
work long term so both of these things
looking at the logic of which people
actually meet the criteria that is
relative to what I say I want longterm
as well as who do I feel like I'm
willing to be vulnerable and honest and
close with are needed in order to have a
healthy long-term relationship but
because some part of that is probably in
a blind spot for you if you are not
securely attached what happens is you
end up having what I call an accidental
bad faith Rel
relationship now the term bad faith is
one that comes up quite often in
business contexts in legal contexts when
debates are happening a bad faith
argument is essentially an argument
where there's a mismatch between what
someone is saying they want or are
arguing for and what they are actually
wanting or arguing for so one or both
parties in a bad faith discussion has a
covert agenda that they are trying to
push so they're trying to get something
or they are trying to convince someone
of something that is not the truth about
what they want or are trying to get
under the surface now there's one
distinction that I want to make clear
off the bat which is that in this
context in business or law or debate bad
faith is generally considered to be a
situation where the person knows that
the argument they are presenting is not
the full truth so where someone is
actually consciously aware that they are
obscuring some aspect of what they want
or trying to argue for so this could be
something as simple as I'm telling you
that I'm coming on your podcast to talk
about this issue but really my secret
hidden motive is to make you look stupid
and to make myself look really good and
that is going to take precedence over
actually getting down to the truth about
this issue that I claim I'm here to
debate I'm actually here to push an
agenda potentially at the expense of the
truth now this is not necessarily the
same thing that's happening in
insecurely attached Dynamics often when
we're going into conflict and we have an
insecure attachment style our real wants
or needs are obscured from ourselves
which is why I call this an accidental
bad faith argument it doesn't
technically meet the definition of bad
faith in that we aren't aware that we're
obscuring an important piece of
information that is guiding our
decision- making but it's functionally a
bad faith disagreement and what I mean
mean by that is that it sort of operates
in the same way as a bad faith argument
or disagreement operates which is that
the issue being argued about often gets
completely obscured or goes unsolved
because both people are pushing covert
agendas the only difference is that in
this case they don't know they're doing
that so what would an example of this
look like let's say you have an anxious
avoidant pairing who is locked in a
conflict so something has happened in
their lives that they can't see eye on
and they have now taken space and
temporarily separated from each other in
order to Think Through what's going on
and very often what happens in this
scenario is the person who leans more
avoidant is going to feel kind of
contemptuous about the argument and go I
just don't want to deal with this drama
and they might feel themselves kind of
shutting down around it and feeling
frustrated or contemptuous towards their
partner and when they're saying that
when they're making that claim to
themselves or their partner I just don't
want drama what might actually be
happening under the surface is that they
don't want to deal with the
vulnerability that would arise for them
if they were to go to their partner and
tell them what they actually want and
need in a way that would truly resolve
the conflict on a deep level those with
avoidant attachment Styles often have
their vulnerabilities particularly their
relational vulnerabilities hidden not
only from their Partners but from
themselves and so the more work I've
done on healing from my avoidant wounds
The more I've unfortunately had to look
at feelings of contempt and foler than
thess as signs that there's some
vulnerability my ego is protecting me
from maybe there's a desire to stay in
control at play because I intentionally
choose Partners who I think would never
be capable of fully understanding me so
of course if I give up control my needs
are going to go unmet because my
partners aren't aware of what my
vulnerabilities are and so when I say I
just want to avoid drama what I might
actually be trying to avoid is being
vulnerable showing someone else what my
needs are and reaching some sort of
compromise that would require me to give
up a little bit of the control I have in
a relationship because again maybe I've
picked a partner who I don't really
trust is capable of meeting my needs
because that feels unthreatening
and on the other side of things you
often have the anxious party in an
anxious avoidant Dynamic going I just
want us to be okay I just want to get
back in the same room and talk things
out because I really care about the
Health and Longevity of this
relationship and that might be true
right it might be true in the same way
that the avoidant saying they don't like
drama is also true it's just not
necessarily the most true thing in that
instance the most true thing in this
instance if you are anxiously attached
might be that you struggle to
self-regulate and so you're pretty
dependent on your partner for
co-regulation because it's the main way
that you keep yourself feeling okay in
the world and when you and your partner
are in Conflict you might be highly
distressed because you don't know how to
regulate yourself in their absence and
so well it might technically be true
that you want to patch things up and you
want the relationship to be healthy what
might be more true is that you're
actually willing to sacrifice some of
the health of the relationship if it
means that you and your partner can just
get back to a place where you are
co-regulating so that you can feel okay
and not distressed again and the reason
this is a bad faith argument on both
sides is because the thing that is being
explicitly stated is usually something
that if you're really honest with
yourself you're willing to sacrifice if
it means your underlying need gets met
but you're often not willing to
explicitly State what your underlying
need is so the avoidant might actually
be causing a lot of drama in their
relationship that could be avoided if
they would simply be vulnerable and
learn to depend on their partner a
little bit now of course that's an
incredibly difficult thing to learn to
do it's not going to happen overnight
but the point is if they're saying I
don't want drama but really they're
willing to cause drama in order to get
their underlying need of avoiding
vulnerability met it's not a good faith
argument the same is true on the
opposite side of things if the anxiously
attached person is saying I just care
about the relationship and want it to be
healthy but they're actually willing to
let the relationship get a little bit
too codependent and unhealthy if it
means that they get that consistent
co-regulation from their partner what
they're saying and what's true is not
necessarily matched up but again both
parties are not doing this consciously
so what needs to happen in order for us
to be in good faith relationships we
need to be willing to start uncovering
what's in our blind spots that's driving
our Behavior without us being
consciously aware of it and the good
news is that this is what attachment
healing is it is the art of making the
unconscious conscious and then taking
more direct and honest rots to getting
our needs met which might mean that
certain things we've been looking for
exclusively inside of romantic
relationships we learn to get satisfied
outside of romantic relationships or
vice versa certain things that we think
we could never have inside of romantic
relationships we might learn is actually
possible so what we're going to move
into next is how to move from a bad
faith into a good faith relationship
Dynamic one of the first things we want
to try to get really clear on is what
our unconscious relationship premise
looks like so when I think of a romantic
relationship what am I actually thinking
of what deep needs do I assume is either
definitely going to get fulfilled
through this relationship or which parts
of myself do I feel like I always need
to leave out in order to have a romantic
relationship so both anxious and
avoidant people alike are likely to give
you the statement I want a healthy
long-term romantic relationship there's
a stereotype that avoidance don't want
relationships but in reality a lot of
the time what you hear is avoidant
saying and truly believing I absolutely
want a healthy long-term relationship
for whatever reason I just haven't found
my person yet but we're going to go
under the surface here so in those with
anxious attachment wounds say the
statement I want a healthy long-term
relationship they often do absolutely
mean that explicitly and
consciously but when we go a little bit
deeper and look at what does that
statement really mean to the person
saying it it's often the case for those
with more anxious wounding that they
have a blind spot in the area of self-
protection so what they are
unconsciously Outsourcing and looking
for in a partner is someone who is going
to make them feel protected stable and
secure as well as to make them feel good
enough and like they are finally worthy
of love all of those things are areas
where we really need to be fulfilling
those needs outside of our partnership
it's not that a partnership can
contribute to them but if we are hinging
all of those wounds onto a single person
it is going to put way too much pressure
on the partnership because as soon as we
get into conflict with a partner in that
case we're no longer going to be
fighting to preserve the partnership
we're going to be fighting to preserve
those feelings of being taken care of
kept safe in the world and feeling
worthy of being loved and so the need to
feel all of those things is going to
automatically kick in and start
obscuring the argument we believe that
we are having so we're going to be
immediately in a bad faith argument if
we have anxious attachment wounds that
get triggered and come online during the
argument so the difference between this
and a secure or a good faith
relationship premise is that secure
people don't look at relationships as
the answer to the problems they feel
around insecurities they look at
relationships as places where they can
go to commiserate and receive support
as they find ways to make themselves
feel more stable and secure and worthy
and proud of themselves in the world so
your partner is someone who you go to to
share your vulnerabilities with but you
don't expect your partner to solve those
problems for you you assume that you are
responsible for solving them and your
partner can serve as a secure base for
you to share that Journey with now we're
going to look at the opposite side of
things with avoidant attachment once
again you usually get that explicit
relationship premise of I just want a
healthy relationship with someone who I
like but often what's happening below
the surface is that a relationship kind
of looks like one of the many checklist
items you think you should cross off
your list in order to have a meaningful
and full life so rather than really
honing in on how a given relationship
makes you feel and how you and your
partner can contribute equally to each
other's lives you might design your own
life exactly how you like it and then go
searching for someone who you think
would fit easily into that life without
you having to change or compromise too
much which often looks like someone who
is a lot more passive than you are about
what they want out of their own lives
but then when conflict starts rearing
its head and your attachment system is
telling you things like you are only a
worthy and acceptable person in the
world if everything in your life is
functioning a certain way and you have
all of these checklist items checked off
now you're not going to be fighting to
preserve the relationship itself you're
going to be fighting to preserve that
checklist and to preserve your idea of
yourself as a worthwhile person who you
can be proud of and the difference
between this way of operating and a more
secure relationship premise is that
secure individuals absolutely want to
find someone who's compatible with their
Lifestyles but they do not go out
searching for someone unconsciously who
they have an inherent position of power
over because they want to be challenged
by their partner in real ways which
means they're also willing to take their
partner seriously during conflict
because they believe that their
partner's perspectives are valuable and
are likely to add incredible value to
their lives if they're to integrate what
their partner needs and wants so this is
about learning to choose relationships
where you feel like your partner is your
true equal rather than relationships
where you feel as though secretly you
have an inherent upper hand because you
believe that your partner could never
really know or see you completely which
by the way may or may not be true you
may genuinely have picked someone who
has very little capacity to fully
understand you but also because a lot of
parts of yourself are hidden from you
from your conscious awareness your
vulnerabilities your needs your wounds
and pains of course whoever you pick
it's never going to be able to properly
meet your needs because you're not
showing them what those are and so this
can quickly become a self-fulfilling
prophecy so just like the anxious party
has to shift their definition of a
healthy relationship to include one
where they are independent and not
looking to their partner to fulfill all
of their needs on their behalf the
avoidant definition of a healthy
relationship has to be one where they
truly see their partner as an equal in
the ways that matter to them so no BS
around oh well you know I bring this but
they bring this and the this that they
bring you secretly think is way less
important than the this that you bring
you have to start working on seeking out
Partnerships where you consider your
partner your true equal air go it
actually makes sense for you to be
vulnerable with them and to compromise
for them and then of course we have
fearful avoidance for fearful avoidance
often that statement I just want a
healthy relationship under the surface
looks like I want a deep passionate
relationship with someone who only sees
the vulnerabilities that I want them to
see in me so fearful avoidance often
have these wounds that are very on the
surface consciously that they want a lot
of co-regulation and support around but
their really deep wounds are ones that
they want to keep hidden forever and
that often are hidden even to them the
same way that's true of those who air
more dismissive avoidant and so the
fearful avoidant idea of a healthy
relationship is often one where they can
have really deep and intimate connection
without ever touching their own shame
and in reality
unfortunately the things that we are
ashamed of are the things that create
real intimacy so if you want to have a
truly intimate relationship of equals as
a fearful avoidant you can't do that
without going into that deep dark place
inside of yourself where your shame
lives and this is something that I'm
going to get more into to in future
videos because it can be so challenging
for those who a fearful avoidant because
they often struggle with toxic shame to
understand why on Earth it would
possibly be helpful for a relationship
to share those parts of themselves but
essentially what we want to get clear on
here is that if your idea of a healthy
relationship means a relationship where
you get to be selective about which
vulnerabilities you share with another
person you are probably not operating in
good faith as soon as you get triggered
because once you're triggered or your
attachment wounding is online what
you're going to be fighting to preserve
is your pride and self-respect rather
than the relationship so what do we do
about all of this we're going to quickly
go over five questions you can start
asking yourself in order to start making
your unconscious relationship premises
more conscious as well as to start
recognizing when you are stuck in a bad
faith disagreement or when you are stuck
in a bad faith relationship where the
explicit premise that you have given to
the other person about why you want to
be in the relationship is not entirely
truthful and I want to encourage
everybody not to shame themselves around
this not to get too hung up on oh my god
I've lied to my partner I'm a terrible
person all of that stuff and instead to
take this as an opportunity to learn in
really concrete ways so question number
one I encourage us to ask ourselves if
we're questioning how much of our
relationship ship is happening in good
versus bad faith is what do my friends
know about this relationship and what I
think about it that my partner does not
know so very often in mutually insecure
Dynamics we find that the people around
the individual so friends or family
members actually know quite a bit more
about what the person's frustrations
inside of the relationship are than the
person's partner knows and this is one
of the Key signs that a lot of the
relationship is happening in bad faith
are there ways in which you secretly
believe that you and your partner are
not compatible long term that you know
and that your friends might know but
your partner does not know are there
ways in which you judge your partner's
moral character behind their back are
there names that you call them or are
there things you diagnose them with that
your friends know about but that you
would never say to your partner again
that might be a sign that there are some
bad faith elements here in a
relationship the person who knows the
most information about what you think
and feel towards your partner as well as
what you think and feel about the
conflicts that you're having is your
partner in a bad faith relationship
often your partner knows significantly
less about what you truly think and feel
about them as well as what you truly
think and feel about your conflicts than
your inner circle does so this is the
first thing we want to check in on is my
partner the the person who knows the
most about my feelings towards my
partner and our relationship or are
there other people who know the more
honest stuff and if that's the case how
do I start bringing that more honest
stuff into my relationship so that I'm
having more good faith conversations
with my partner and if the stuff that my
friends know would be too hurtful or too
insulting to possibly bring to my
partner that probably doesn't Point
towards the direction of good faith for
the relation reltionship because
presumably your partner believes that
you do respect them and want to be with
them and if you're holding on to
opinions that are so insulting that it
would likely cause them to leave the
relationship if they were to find out
that's a pretty strong indication of bad
faith which blends very naturally into
question number two which is is my
partner someone who I have genuine
respect for do I think that they more or
less share my values and moral code
which includes values around how to
treat other people including how to
treat me so am I generally a fan of how
my partner treats me do I think this is
a good egg this is a good person I found
or do I secretly think that my partner
is a terrible person who I would never
recommend to anybody else to date that's
a pretty strong sign that I might not
have respect for their moral character
and then on the flip side of things do I
believe believe that my partner is truly
my intellectual equal so that doesn't
necessarily mean that we're in the same
field and know all of the same things
but do I really trust and feel proud of
my partner's ability to reason do I
respect that when they are making an
argument to me they are making a valid
and rational argument that I feel
comfortable taking at face value or do I
secretly think that in most areas I'm
able to reason a lot better than my
partner and I don't really have to
respect their point of view in either
case if you believe that you are either
of significantly higher moral character
than your partner or of significantly
higher intellectual character than your
partner you are probably not operating
in good faith if you are claiming that
what you want is a secure relationship
secure relationships happen between two
people who see each other as equals in
those two categories the third question
I encourage us all to ask ourselves when
we are in conflict is what am I actually
arguing for here and to be really
ruthlessly and brutally honest with
yourself about the answer to that
question so start getting really clear
with yourself on what is so important to
you under the surface that you are
actually willing to either abandon your
partner or abandon yourself in the
process process of getting it so maybe I
believe that if my partner sees me as a
bad person in any way they will stop
wanting to be with me so now when we're
in a conflict I'm actually fighting to
preserve their idea of me as a good
person more than I'm fighting to fix
whatever issue it is that we're arguing
about maybe I kind of know if I'm
incredibly honest with myself that
there's a way in which I messed up and I
need to apologize but I'm so afraid that
that means my partner will think that
I'm bad and stop loving me that I'm
willing to slightly twist and bend my
arguments in order to make myself seem
perfectly innocent so I'm having a bad
faith argument and again it's motivated
by a very real fear but what I say I'm
arguing about and what I'm actually
fighting for are two different things or
is the basis of my argument secretly
under the surface that I want to stay in
the position of control in this
relationship because maybe I don't trust
what decisions my partner would make if
they were to Take Over Control maybe I
feel like my needs would not get seen
and met and so am I arguing one thing on
the surface when under the surface what
I'm actually fighting for is to stay in
the dominant position where I get to
make the majority of the major decisions
that matter about this
relationship again as soon as that's the
case unless I am explicitly stating that
that's what I'm doing so unless we are
explicitly saying things like I am
fighting to get you to see me as a good
person or I am fighting in order to
regain control because I don't trust
what would happen if I lost it we are
having a bad faith disagreement if
either of those things are in fact what
we're fighting for under the surface and
as much as that sounds really funny when
I say it right like most of us can't
imagine going to our partner and saying
Hey I want you to allow me to stay in
control all of the time in the
relationship or hey I want you to always
think of me as a good person and
completely not notice any of the things
that I do wrong it sounds ridiculous to
ask for those things but I want you to
consider that you probably are asking
for those things all of the time just
not overtly so this is the process of
making the unconscious conscious so that
we can find healthier ways to talk to
our partners about what our
vulnerabilities are in inside of the
relationship and very often nobody likes
to hear this but this actually is the
truth a lot of the time in insecurely
attached relationships we have found
Partners who unconsciously like that we
have suppressed the things we have
suppressed so we might find that as we
make our relationship premises more
explicit our partners might genuinely be
turned off or want no part in the
relationship and part of becoming more
secure is learning that if I bring the
true premise my true wants in a
relationship to someone else and they
say absolutely not I don't want that
that's not the partner for me or if I'm
absolutely sure it is the partner for me
but they look at me and say absolutely
not you cannot have full control over
this relationship then what comes next
maybe it's time to do some changing and
compromising to stay in the
relationship but we're never going to
know what situation we're in until we
first make those unconscious premises
conscious for ourselves so that we can
become aware of and when it applies
start asking directly for what our needs
actually are fourth question I encourage
you to ask yourself especially in the
moment of conflict is am I taking my
partner at face value here and am I
presenting my own argument at face value
or are there things that I know I'm not
saying because I don't want to upset my
partner because I think that they'll get
mad if I say that because I think that
they'll think poorly of me if I say that
so again the point here isn't to shame
ourselves it's just to get aware of when
we're in a bad faith disagreement
because often it's very confusing when
we're in a bad faith argument and it
just keeps going on and on and on or the
same relationship issues come up again
and again and again and we don't know
why this is the process of figuring out
what is going on in those recurring
conflict situations that make them feel
so confusing this is something that's
kind of hard to hear but being securely
attached means if you feel like the only
way to get your needs seen and met in
your partnership are to lie manipulate
your partner or force them in some other
dishonest way to care about your needs
the secure thing to do is to not be
particularly close to that person when a
secure person is making evaluations
about a potential partnership what they
do is try expressing their needs
directly and noticing whether their
partner cares about those needs and
takes them at face value and if they
don't they take it as a sign that this
probably isn't the best person to get
into a serious relationship with and on
the flip side of things when secure
people go into relationships if they
feel as though they have to treat their
partner with kid gloves during arguments
because their partners are either too
fragile or too unintelligent for them to
share the full truth with that's also
going to be assigned to them that this
person isn't someone they can have a
truly equal partnership with airo it's
not someone that they would necessarily
choose to be in a romantic relationship
with so I just want us to pause on that
and really integrate that point if I
feel like the only way to get my needs
met are to obscure information lie to my
partner exaggerate my position or
manipulate my partner into meeting my
needs I'm probably not operating in good
faith if what I say is that I want a
secure partnership a secure partnership
means I walk away if that's the only way
I know how to get my needs met and again
that's not to shame anybody for where
they're at it's just to offer a bit of a
reality check the last question I would
encourage you to ask yourself if you're
trying to root out how to have more good
faith relationships is what qualities
are really important for me in a
partnership and how has that worked out
for me in the past and what I want to
really make clear here is that I don't
want you to think about your ideals here
I want you to look at your relationship
history and what your past partners have
had in common so the reason why I
encourage you to look at history not
ideals is because your history is more
indicative of what you are unconsciously
looking for in Partners so I remember
when I was in my early 20s I worked at
this online magazine and we used to send
out surveys relatively frequently that
would ask people what types of articles
are you interested in and these surveys
were completely Anonymous so people
could fill out whatever they wanted and
people often reported that they wanted
to see these kind of highlevel balance
point of view articles but in reality
the data from those same users did not
reflect that at all what people claimed
they wanted to click on was very
different than what they actually
clicked on because what we actually
click on or who we actually date is
often a product of our subconscious or
our unconscious ious Minds versus what
we say we want is a product of our
conscious Minds so what I want to
encourage us all to look at is which
traits have my past partners all had in
common and is that the same or different
from what I think that I want in a
partner so do I say that I want a really
emotionally available person but I
repeatedly choose Partners who are not
emotionally available and what might be
happening in my unconscious or in my
blind spot that is driving me towards
those people maybe when I'm picturing an
emotionally available person I'm
picturing them being really attentive to
my needs but I'm not picturing me having
to attend to theirs and maybe that
situation actually kind of freaks me out
because unconsciously I'm looking for
someone who's more of a parent figure
and so the work that might need to get
done there is how do I build myself into
the type of person who doesn't want
someone who's this idealized parent
figure who I think is going to swoop in
and save me from myself and all of my
problems but rather how do I build
myself into someone who's really
comfortable trading off that secure base
role and sometimes being the one who is
the strong competent in control one in
the relationship and sometimes letting
my partner Take the Lead depending on
when it makes sense for each of us to
play those roles or on the flip side of
things do I say I want an equal but in
all of my past relationships I've gone
for partners who I don't really see as
my equal and if that's the case how do I
work myself into a position where my own
vulnerabilities are more conscious for
me so that I don't have to worry that if
I let my partner take some of the
control in the relationship they're
going to run it into the ground because
they don't actually know what my deeper
needs and vulnerabilities are and this
is the way that we slowly work ourselves
towards that more secure Dynamic where
the things under the surface and the
things that we State and put on the
table in the relationship are for the
most part the same thing and once again
don't beat yourself up too heavily in
this process the things that go into our
blind spots when we are young go there
because they were very adaptive for us
early on in life so this process of
uncovering our blind spots and figuring
out what we once internalized that we no
longer need to have internalized is
actually a really empowering one and
it's one that can lead us to some really
incredible healing opportunities if we
stay open to it all right that's all I
have to say for today on this topic as
always let me know in the comments any
thoughts feelings questions you have
arising for you as you go through this
video as always I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]