hey guys heidi preeb here welcome back
to my channel this week we are talking
about the different insecure attachment
styles so avoidant anxious and fearful
avoidant we might not get to fearful
avoidance this week but we will get
there and why they fear intimacy so
there is kind of this trope in
attachment communities that people who
use avoidant attachment strategies have
a fear of intimacy but those who use an
anxious attachment strategy love
intimacy that they are intimacy junkies
that they can't get enough of it and i
absolutely agree that this is true on a
conscious level okay so people using
anxious attachment strategies tend to
tell you outright that they really want
and crave and thrive on emotional
intimacy and intensity right and that
they want to get more and more of that
and even that it can feel like a bit of
a hit for them like it can feel like
kind of a drug to get to know someone on
a really deep level really fast but
knowing someone deeply and quickly and
intensely is not the same thing as
emotional intimacy okay and we're going
to talk in this video about what true
emotional intimacy is and why the
anxious style like the avoidant style
actually has a fear of true adult
emotional intimacy okay i'm trying to
think of a good metaphor for this um
marianne williamson has this book on
weight loss where she talks about people
who compulsively eat tend to think that
they really love and enjoy food but she
makes the point that if you really love
and enjoy food what that means is that
you savor your food you put a lot of
intentional care into everything you eat
and as you're eating it you're really
present with your food and you really
pay attention to how you feel in your
body as a response to it versus
compulsive overeaters are more likely to
actually kind of zone out when they eat
they might want to always have the tv on
when they're eating they might eat while
they're doing other things they're
probably less likely to be truly
savoring and experiencing their food in
a very present way when they're eating
and this is kind of the same thing with
people who consider themselves to be
intimacy or emotional junkies right if
you always want that hit always want
that intensity always want to go right
to the core you hate small talk you
can't stand anything other than the most
intense personal conversations with
people you are not fostering and
savoring a sense of emotional intimacy
you're actually rushing right past
emotional intimacy and going straight to
enmeshment right enmeshment is when
you're kind of merging with someone else
it's where there's very little
differentiation between you two so you
can't actually properly see where one
person ends and the other begins because
it's this desire to kind of share the
human experience so intensely that there
is no space between you that is not
intimacy intimacy is when you're able to
draw your boundaries clearly enough that
you can properly see each other because
if you have no dividing lines between
you and someone else you aren't actually
able to observe where you end and they
begin and observing where you end and
someone else begins is the birthplace of
intimacy because you're able to actually
understand what things are like for them
in a way that is separate from what it's
like for you and that is what it means
to see someone else when you're feeling
desperate to get to that intensity the
heart of things you're probably looking
to kind of lose yourself a little bit in
someone else and when you are lost in
someone else you are not giving yourself
a proper vantage point to see them from
it's like you're blacking out while
eating or using a substance both of
which by the way i'm not judging i've
very much been there for many years of
my life in all of these areas and that's
how i know that when we are doing these
things we are not savoring or
appreciating what we're doing we are
using these things to forget ourselves
now this is layer one for the anxious
attachment style of why they fear
emotional intimacy because if they had
true emotional intimacy it would
actually require them to take a step
back it would require them to show up as
themselves put boundaries around
themselves let the other person have
boundaries and share across those
boundaries and that is scary for someone
with an anxious attachment style because
they tend to instinctually perceive
boundaries to be barriers to getting to
know someone rather than healthy limits
that are put in place so that both
people can appreciate one another fully
so the most conscious reason why someone
with an anxious attachment strategy
might be fearful of intimacy is because
intimacy requires boundaries boundaries
feel threatening for an anxious
attachment style here's why many people
with anxious attachment strategies in
play will not realize that this is what
they're doing okay but there is an
unconscious need or belief that someday
someone will come around be able to
cater and respond appropriately to all
of their needs and when that happens
they will finally feel happy and
fulfilled and like all of their problems
will be gone it is that savior fantasy
right and again sometimes that's
conscious for them most of the time it's
not it's operating under the surface but
there is usually with people using
anxious attachment strategies that sense
of someday someone's going to come along
and be the answer to all of my emotional
pain and this is why very often you see
anxiously attached people chasing
avoidant people because if an anxious
person were to chase let's say another
anxious person or a secure person both
of those people would come into the
equation with their own needs and
vulnerabilities and weaknesses and for
someone using an anxious attachment
strategy they unconsciously don't want
to have to deal with anyone else's needs
or feelings or experiences that are
vulnerable and difficult because it
means that that person is suddenly not
available to deal with their needs and
challenges and problems unconsciously
people using an anxious attachment
strategy are kind of seeking out a
parent figure and they would not tell
you this they might not even admit it to
themselves but their dream when they're
picturing that perfect relationship
they're usually picturing a relationship
where the person they're with either has
no vulnerabilities and attends to theirs
full time or who has very specific
vulnerabilities that the anxiously
attached person is imagining they will
help them bust through and get over in
this kind of romantic fantasy but that
fantasy does not leave room for true
unsexy vulnerabilities and problems and
emotional dysregulation that eventually
any partner of any attachment style will
end up showing up with so the reason why
anxiously attached people tend to chase
avoidantly attached people is because on
the surface avoidantly attached people
look like they have no needs and no
vulnerabilities and nothing to work
through on their own because they do not
share the parts of themselves that they
struggle with so for the anxiously
attached person who is unconsciously
looking for a bit of a parent figure who
will put all of their own needs aside
and attend to theirs the avoidantly
attached person looks like that person
they look like a person who is so
self-regulated and so on top of their
emotions that they can now attend to
yours full time but that's not actually
what the avoidant attachment style is
because true intimacy between two people
is not about one person sharing and the
other person endlessly caretaking for
them it's also not about one person
savioring the other which might be part
of a fantasy that someone using an
anxious strategy might have around how
they're going to deal with their
partners insecurities and
vulnerabilities true intimacy is two
people supporting one another as they
work through their own problems and
challenges and this doesn't mean that
they never help each other it doesn't
mean that they aren't there to talk
things through and vent about things
together but true intimacy requires two
people showing up as their adult selves
and to be your adult self means to be
able to self-regulate to be able to take
care of your own difficult or tough
emotions when they come up and to not
expect your partner to fix anything for
you and the idea that a partner is not
going to be the thing that fixes their
emotional challenges is unconsciously
very threatening for the anxiously
attached style because they feel
perpetually like they have a little bit
of an open wound that they don't know
how to heal on their own and this is
where all of those fantasies about a
savior about a partner who is going to
help them feel better once and for all
for good come into play they feel like
they don't know how to patch up that
wound but true intimacy requires two
people who are responsible for patching
up their own wounds and healing their
own pain and their own trauma and simply
supporting each other in the process in
a parallel way right like you're moving
side by side giving support to each
other rather than staring directly into
each other's eyes and looking at each
other as the solution to those problems
but that wounded inner child that lives
inside of someone who uses an anxious
attachment strategy doesn't want to do
that they don't feel capable of taking
responsibility for their own healing
because they feel inside like kind of a
scared little kid right so true
emotional intimacy which is taking
responsibility for your own feelings
your own healing your own direction in
life and also being there to support
someone else as they take responsibility
for their own lives is threatening to
that inner child inside of the anxiously
attached person who feels like they're
still kind of waiting for the person to
show up and show them how to navigate
the world right and it isn't baked into
their fantasy that true emotional
intimacy someone truly showing up to
help them in that way would be someone
who encourages them to stand on their
own two feet rather than relying on them
for support so that's layer two okay
layer three of fearing emotional
intimacy for the anxiously attached
person is kind of baked into layer two
but it's the fact that if they were
emotionally intimate with someone else
they would have to at some point
acknowledge their own flaws shortcomings
and things they struggle with that are
not necessarily nice good or innocent
now again the anxious attachment
strategy involves having a wounded inner
child and that wounded inner child feels
perpetually as though they are owed care
and attention from someone else now the
reason the child feels that way is
because they didn't get the consistent
warmth and affection and validation and
encouragement that they truly did need
and deserve as a child and so people
using an anxious strategy tend to grow
up almost feeling in some way like they
have that kind of purity that a child
has where they don't yet know that they
can make mistakes they can hurt people
they can do things wrong and it can
actually be incredibly difficult for
those using an anxious attachment
strategy to take responsibility for the
ways in which they are hurting other
people the ways in which they are
expecting their partners to do things
for them that their partner is not
comfortable doing the ways that even
though they're showing up with good
intent in many cases they might be
accidentally hurting someone else by not
properly considering the other person's
true point of view okay because with the
anxious attachment strategy there is
this inherent sense of i am innocent
that is at the core of their worldview
and it lives in that kind of childlike
sense of them that they never properly
were able to grow up because they didn't
have the guidance they needed to grow it
up properly so now as adults when you
have an anxious element to your
attachment style it can actually be
incredibly threatening to your ego to
see yourself as doing something wrong or
is hurting someone else because in your
mind as long as your intentions are good
no one could possibly get hurt however
that is absolutely not how things work
in the real world right so true
emotional intimacy between two adult
partners requires both people taking
responsibility for the ways in which
they hurt each other for the mistakes
that they make and also for the parts of
their personality that aren't
particularly glamorous so for the
anxious attachment strategy part of
which involves a view of the self as
endlessly good and as the kind of person
who would never do something to hurt
another person it's that exact part of
the ego that has to be put down in order
for true emotional intimacy to form but
that can be very threatening for people
using an anxious attachment strategy
because their entire view of self is
oriented around that view of the self as
a good and caring and giving and only
loving person and if your ego is
oriented around that it's very difficult
to recognize when you have made a
mistake when you have hurt someone else
when you have projected your own need
onto someone else in a situation where
actually it's your responsibility to
self-regulate and to take responsibility
for the way that you feel and the way
that you're showing up in the world and
so the kind of deepest level of why
emotional intimacy can be scary for
those using an anxious attachment
strategy is because it requires you to
see yourself clearly both for better and
for worse and to be able to communicate
without a crushing amount of shame which
is what you might feel when you start to
try to communicate this the ways in
which you are not perfect you are not
perfectly loving you are not perfectly
selfless and the good news is absolutely
nobody is right so it's probably not as
shameful as you might feel in your bones
that it is to admit those things but
again from the get-go it can be really
difficult to access the part of the self
that can see the self clearly
acknowledge the impact that even your
good intentions can have on someone else
in a negative way own up to those things
and talk about better strategies for
fixing those problems so again intimacy
requires two people in their adult
selves taking responsibility for their
own emotions and yes absolutely
supporting each other getting to know
each other sharing in each other's highs
and lows in life but ultimately always
returning to the self as the main source
of security right and that is a scary
thought for the anxiously attached
person who doesn't have a strong
internal secure base that they can turn
to when times get rough again it's
having that locus of control or that
center of gravity outside of the south
and really fearing a situation in which
you have to turn inward to get the
resources you need but without the
ability to do that it's really hard to
have any true source of emotional
intimacy because you're not being
interdependent if you're looking towards
each other to get all of your needs met
that's codependence and it's not
emotional intimacy it's emotional
addiction to co-regulating through
someone else so the route to healing for
the anxiously attached individual is
always going to be the process of
fostering that secure base within
yourself so that you can approach
relationships at a lower intensity level
right
intimacy requires the ability to savor
and appreciate and be present with
another person without needing for it to
be so intense and so much volume right
and in order to move at a comfortable
and non-panicked pace towards intimacy
you have to have the ability to
self-regulate when someone let's say
isn't texting you back as quickly as you
would like you have to have the ability
to shift perspective understand that
other people have different needs and
desires and wants than you do and you
have to be able to accommodate those
things without losing your sense of
self-worth in the process and until you
can do that it's going to be really
difficult to have true interdependent
intimacy between adults right so we will
talk much more in future videos about
the attachment healing process and i
want to note that none of this is about
shaming or saying that you're wrong for
the way you process as an insecurely
attached person it's just about being
aware of what your patterning is so that
you can take a more direct approach to
fixing that patterning and showing up in
the world in a way that makes you feel a
lot more secure in yourself which is the
ultimate goal for anyone with an
insecure attachment strategy right all
right that's all that i have to say for
today on the anxious attachment style
and their fear of intimacy let me know
in the comments what your thoughts are
what's coming up for you as you go
through these videos as always i love
you guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]
you