hey guys heidi preeb here today i wanted
to clarify something that i think comes
up as a question quite a bit in the
minds of people who are interacting with
people who have an anxious attachment
strategy this is kind of a
conversational or particularly a
conflict pitfall that i see specifically
anxious and avoidant types falling into
very very often so when we look at both
sides of the attachment spectrum we have
anxious on one side which is more
emotionally organized so their world
view their understanding of how the
world works is organized more through
the lens of their personal feelings than
it is through the lens of temporal order
so they're more inclined especially when
their attachment system is triggered and
they're dealing with an interpersonal
situation to rely on how they feel to
tell them the truth about what's
happening
versus those on the avoidant side of the
spectrum rely more on temporal order
than on their inner emotional world so
they're more likely to try to understand
a situation through the lens of what
concretely caused what to happen rather
than which emotions are impacting my
experience of this situation and how can
i communicate and work through those as
a means of resolving the situation so
this trap that often anxious and
avoidant types in particular will fall
into when they get into conflict is that
the anxiously attached person will be
trying desperately to communicate how
they feel because they believe that the
way they feel is communicating an
important truth about the situation at
hand and the avoidant person will get
really stuck on the temporal order of
things if there are incongruencies in
what the anxiously attached person is
saying and usually there are because an
attachment strategy that is inherent to
the anxious style is to exaggerate their
emotion and their inner experience if
they feel as though it's not being seen
and understood by the other person so
when you have an anxious attachment
strategy and you have a feeling in your
body and you do not know how to get rid
of it on your own the number one thing
that every single cell in your body is
telling you to do is to get someone else
to understand the way that you are
feeling so they can help you to stop
feeling that way or through some sort of
interaction even a negative one even
something like a fight or an argument
which at least gives you focused intense
personal attention it will help your
arousal come down if you can only get
the other person to see the pain that
you are currently in so the important
thing to keep in mind here is that in
the mind of the anxiously attached
person particularly when their
attachment system is very activated and
online the most important thing to them
is communicating their emotion the facts
of the matter are far less important and
in their minds don't really matter as
much so let's say the anxiously attached
person had a difficult day at work and
they felt insulted by something that
someone said and let's say they come
home and tell their partner and they
don't really get the reaction they were
expecting out of their partner they
thought that they would receive a lot of
focused empathy and attention but
instead maybe their partner went that
wouldn't bother me that much i think you
should just brush it off now the
important thing here is that the
anxiously attached person could be in a
triggered state where they are feeling a
lot of intensity in their body and they
believe that if you only understood how
they were feeling then you would give
them the co-regulation they need so they
might distort the facts of what happened
in order to accurately convey the
emotion that is present in them so they
might think okay let me think of what
would have happened that would have made
you feel this way and they might present
the situation as though that were what
actually happened but not because they
are consciously trying to mislead you
for any logical reason they're not
trying to get you to have false thoughts
their motivation is to try to get you to
understand the feeling that they're
having and distorting the facts of the
situation is just one means one possible
way of getting you to understand the
feeling which in their mind is the
absolute most important thing that must
be communicated the facts can be fudged
so that the truth which is their
emotional experience which by the way is
true the emotional experience that they
are trying to communicate feels so true
for them because it actually is
happening like it's a state that they
are currently embodying inside of their
physical form right so they're not lying
about their feelings and that's
important to remember but they might be
exaggerating or fudging what happened in
order to elicit what they believe is a
parallel feeling in you so in order to
get you to understand and grasp the
truth of what they are currently feeling
which to them feels like the absolute
most important thing to communicate now
when you have an anxious partner with a
more avoidant partner and this can also
happen with a secure partner but it's a
lot more likely to happen with an
avoidant partner the avoidant partner is
more likely to get really stuck on
trying to figure out any incongruencies
in the story because in the avoidant
mind what they often do to help
themselves change their feelings is
understand the sequence of events that
led up to them feeling that way and then
try to unpack what they might be
misunderstanding or what they might be
missing about someone else's perspective
that allows them to kind of dismiss that
feeling inside of themselves by
understanding the context in which it
developed but
when the avoidant person attempts to
unpack or to understand the temporal
order of their anxious partner's series
of events that they have presented if
the anxious party is exaggerating or
there are holes in their story which
often there will be if they are very
triggered and they are kind of
haphazardly conveying a situation with a
fair bit of exaggeration in toe the
avoidant person is going to get really
stuck on well why would they say that or
why would they do that or i thought you
said this and the anxious person will
read that as the avoidant person
invalidating their feeling but really
what the avoidant person is doing is
trying to understand what led to their
feeling and they're getting stuck and
confused in the process because there
are holes in the story and again the
anxious person is likely to interpret
this as you are telling me that i
shouldn't be feeling the way i'm feeling
you're telling me my feelings are wrong
you're not validating me you're not
acknowledging me well on the avoidant
side of things they're seeing it as i'm
trying to understand the scenario so
that i understand kind of what led to
this but again because these two
approach emotions differently and
approach the understanding of emotions
differently there is this kind of death
spiral that they can get caught in in
this process so of course there are
steps that can be taken from both sides
here so the person using an anxious
attachment strategy has a growth
opportunity in learning to understand
the cause of their emotions so often
those using an anxious strategy feel
their emotions extremely intensely but
often omit the sequence of events
particularly their role in the sequence
of events that led to them ultimately
feeling that way and so the
responsibility that needs to be taken
here of course is for the anxiously
attached person to start considering
context more when it comes to how they
feel and that is an imperative part of
the growth process if you are looking to
heal your attachment style as someone
using an anxious strategy but if you are
using an avoidance strategy and you are
attempting to understand why these
fights keep happening over and over and
over again and why these exaggerations
keep happening when it would make more
sense in your mind if your partner would
just tell you what happened so you could
help them understand the situation and
you could find the way out of it
together what you need to understand is
that the story is irrelevant to someone
using an anxious attachment strategy who
is exaggerating the story is nothing
more than a means of explaining and
trying to get you to see the way that
they're feeling and their need for
comfort so if you can ignore the story
and focus only on the feeling and ask
them more questions about what they're
feeling what they're going through what
they need that is a very likely way to
circumnavigate a lot of arguing and a
lot of disharmony now i'm not suggesting
that you cater to someone's anxious
attachment strategy i suggest that if
you are going to engage in this way you
ask them to kind of meet you in the
middle by asking directly how are you
feeling that the story to me doesn't
matter as much but if there's something
you're trying to communicate to me about
how you're feeling i want you to tell me
directly so that we can work with that a
lot of the time when an anxious
attachment strategy is active in someone
they will be trying to elicit the way
they want you to feel without directly
telling you so they might tell you a
very dramatic story and kind of expect
you to have a certain response and that
bypasses the work of them showing up
naming their emotions and communicating
them directly which is the secure
response so the best way to handle this
situation is to invite them into that
secure conversation hey it seems like
you are experiencing a really strong
emotion right now is that something that
you wanted to talk to me about if so i'm
here and often there can be this very
nice middle ground where those using
avoidant attachment strategies tend to
have a pretty good grasp on how a given
sequence of events comes together in
order to produce a certain outcome and
the person using an anxious attachment
strategy tends to have a more somatic
and embodied experience of their
emotions so in an ideal world these two
could actually contribute kind of
missing pieces of a puzzle in
conversation if they're able to meet in
that secure place rather than getting
fixated on what they are both prone to
get fixated on so the person using an
anxious attachment strategy is prone to
attempting to elicit a certain reaction
in someone else without directly saying
how they're feeling and what they need
and people using avoidant strategies are
more prone to fixating on the details of
what happened and trying to figure out
the specific sequence of events rather
than acknowledging that what actually
needs to get dealt with in this moment
what is present in this moment is a
surplus of emotion and that surplus of
emotion in someone else is not always
solved by understanding the sequence of
events the way that it might be for them
so to meet in the middle here both
people have to be willing to abandon
their strategy to an extent and work
together to communicate in a new way and
this ended up being way more of a
conflict resolution video than i
expected it to be but the point i'm
trying to make here is that there is a
function to the anxious attachment
strategy of emphasizing and exaggerating
what happened and in some cases lying
about what happened but it's not because
they're attempting to mislead you about
the facts what it is is that when that
anxious attachment strategy is triggered
in their minds the facts only serve as
supporting evidence to what they're
feeling and because they are sure
without a shadow of a doubt about what
they're feeling to them it doesn't
really matter when they're activated if
the facts get fudged because the end
goal is just communicating that emotion
and if they can communicate that emotion
accurately through distorting the facts
a little bit mission accomplished right
so there is a purpose to this
exaggeration their end goal is not
misleading you or distorting you about
what happened their end goal is
expressing and getting you to understand
how they feel and that at the end of the
day is going to be what stops the
distortions of events if you can not
focus on those and you can only focus in
on the feeling and invite them to meet
you in that secure place where both
emotions are clearly expressed and also
facts logic and the sequence of events
is displayed factually and in order to
give them the safety to meet you there
you have to be willing to not dismiss
the way they're feeling based on the
situation at hand so if they tell you
the situation for what it is and you
think they're having an overreaction
which you might a non-helpful thing to
do is to dismiss the way that they're
feeling and communicate that you believe
it's an overreaction that is going to
get you right back into that pattern of
distorting the sequence of events so
that in their eyes they have given you a
sequence of events that you would see as
valid relative to the way that they're
feeling if you want to meet in that
secure middle ground as a more avoidant
leaning partner with an anxious partner
you have to be willing to take their
feelings at face value and on the flip
side they have to be willing to show up
honestly and communicate what actually
happened honestly and that is how you
eventually arrive in that middle ground
where both true emotional information
and
true cognitive information are being
integrated and this is a little bit pie
in the sky if you are at the beginning
of your attachment healing journey but
this is a really great place you can get
to interpersonally if both partners are
willing to be aware of and lay down
their attachment strategies when needed
in order to get to a place where both
people understand each other and are
working together to solve problems
instead of working against each other
and keeping that cycle going forever all
right that is all i have to say for
today on that topic let me know in the
comments what your thoughts and
experiences are in this area i love you
guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]
you