hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about self-esteem and today in
particular we're going to talk about the
concept of discipline specifically
through the lens of being hard on
ourselves or trying to essentially bully
ourselves into being more disciplined
and what we're going to go over is why
this model does not work why you cannot
simply bully yourself into performing
more effectively long term and what's
going to work instead that might
currently be in your blind spot
especially if you identify as someone
who tends to be too hard on themselves
now this phrase is one that I really
want to spend some time unpacking today
because I think that there are two ways
to be too hard on yourself so to speak
the first way is to speak negatively to
yourself so to have this really strong
internal critic constantly telling you
that you should be doing more you should
be trying hard harder that you should be
actualizing on more of your goals that's
often what you hear people referring to
when they talk about being too hard on
themselves what they're essentially
saying is that I'm lower in discipline
than I would like to be and I am higher
in self-criticism than I would like to
be so we're going to start forming a
quadrant here and this is the kind of
stereotypical heart ony yourself
quadrant the low discipline low empathy
side of things where you have this idea
that if only you could force yourself to
get more done then you would be
successful so essentially the aspiration
of people who find themselves in this
quadrant is to move up to the high
discipline low empathy quadrant where
they're still berating themselves and
telling themselves negative things about
themselves but those thoughts that inner
critic is being used in service of
keeping you disciplined and getting
things done now the problem with this
quadrant is that well it might seem more
attractive than being in the lower one
it is a fast track to burnout because
when we are forcing ourselves to stay on
track with goals that we don't actually
feel aligned with what we are doing is
resisting our Natural Energy and when we
are consistantly resisting our Natural
Energy we always end up crashing at some
point so this part of the quadrant where
we're forcing ourselves to be rigid in
our habits eventually knocks us right
back to where we started from which is
full of procrastination and self-hatred
so what we're going to talk about today
is how we can add some additional
options into this equation and doing
that is going to require you going into
a blind spot if you're someone who grew
up thinking that the only way to get
things done was to force yourself to do
what you hate this is likely to have
been the case if you grew up with
something like complex PTSD toxic shame
very low self-awareness or minimal
mirroring so you didn't actually get to
learn what it is that that you like to
do and what it is that naturally
motivates you to act as opposed to
fighting your own energy the whole way
through so one thing that I want to make
clear is that when I say the term
empathy in this video or when I use
self-empathy as a term that I encourage
us to move towards what I'm really
talking about here is self Attunement so
it doesn't mean feeling sorry for
yourself all of the time what it means
is noticing and deeply understanding
your own energy and how it works and the
better we get at this the better we get
at forming habits that we're actually
able to consistently maintain so now
we're going to look at the other side of
this quadrant that those of us who have
only learned to motivate ourselves
through bullying ourselves might be
completely unaware of the other side of
this quadrant looks like this on the
bottom right hand we have low discipline
High empathy or self atunement and then
in the top Corner we have high
discipline High empathy or
self-attunement and this is the area we
want to start getting ourselves to we do
not want to end up in the burnout Zone
where forcing oursel to act leads to
collapse what we want to start doing is
getting attuned enough to ourselves that
we understand how to form habits that
work for us and that will allow us to
naturally stay disciplined because we're
working with our energy as we move
towards our goals not away from it so
the counterintuitive route to go going
from this bottom quadrant where we have
low discipline low empathy or
self-attunement into this place where we
have high discipline and high
self-attunement is actually to make a
lateral move first rather than a
vertical one in this top quadrant that
we're all trying to get to we have a
sense of purpose and meaning and that
sense of purpose and meaning is what
gets us up in the mornings on the days
when we really don't want to go to work
it's what makes us manage our energy
intentionally around the things that we
want to get done in life so that we're
not fighting ourselves we're actually
prioritizing our health and well-being
because we see ourselves as instrumental
to the things that we want to do with
our lives so taking care of ourselves
becomes an important part of a greater
whole and in order to get there we have
to learn who we are and what that
purpose is so in this bottom quadrant
down here we have desire and
exploration when we start to get to know
ourselves and get in tune with ourselves
and start learning The rhythms of our
unique Energy System what happens is we
start to get ideas about which
directions we might want to move it and
it actually doesn't make sense to become
super disciplined right away before we
know what path we ought to be walking
down so it's actually going to be really
important to go through a period of
exploration of getting to know ourselves
noticing what feels like a yes for us
versus what feels like a no for us and
then testing out different habits or
routines or roots to moving towards
those things that feel purposeful and
meaningful for us without having a super
strong attachment to the outcome from
the get-go because in this process of
exploration we learn not just where we
want to get to but how we like to travel
there so which types of work do I enjoy
getting up in the morning and doing the
grunt work of not just where do I want
to end up in my career in a big shiny
exciting way what problems do I most
enjoy struggling with even on the days
where I'm feeling exhausted what
naturally excites me and motivates me
and makes me want to enthusiastically
wrestle with the problems that come up
on Route these are all of the questions
that we start examining when we move
into the desire and exploration part of
this process so we're going to talk a
little bit about how we make these moves
especially if we're in that low
discipline low low empathy side of the
quadrant how do we get to that place
where we are highly disciplined and
highly attuned to ourselves so to make
that initial lateral move from low
discipline low empathy to low discipline
High empathy what we want to do is start
getting in touch with what we actually
love and want versus what we want to
want so what our ego wants that we are
authentic embodied selves actually don't
and this is a surprisingly hard thing to
do but when you master it it's also a
skill that you need to take with you for
the rest of your life because no matter
how many times you start getting it
right in life and moving into that high
discipline High Attunement head space
you are going to have to
continuously use refine and rely upon
this skill this skill of checking in
with yourself and going is this
something that I authentically want or
is it something that maybe I once
authentically wanted that is now expired
or that I think I want or I really
really want to want but that if I'm
being completely honest with myself I
just don't some major part of me is
resisting it and of course sometimes
resistance will come up on root to our
goals in a way that it's quite fruitful
to work through so we also have to learn
to identify what's kind of nervousness
or fear on the way to what I want versus
what is a no in my body and one of the
things that's going to help us start to
attune to this is to start being present
with the parts of ourselves that we are
currently just bullying the parts of
ourselves that are feeling drained and
uncreative and uninspired the parts of
ourselves that procrastinate that are
lazy that don't rile up to get the job
done when we want to instead of bullying
those parts we have to learn to go sit
down on the couch next to them and get
to know them
instead of asking why can't I get this
thing done try asking yourself what is
my resistance wanting me to
know why is it that I seem to need so
much rest right now why is it that I
seem to need so much distraction right
now why is it that my brain doesn't want
to focus and be in the present moment
what is the most compassionate possible
interpretation of the way that I'm
currently
behaving because when we start that
conversation with ourselves when we
welcome in the parts of ourselves that
are resisting discipline often what we
learn is that those parts of ourselves
are actually Desperately Seeking out
discipline of a much higher order so
discipline that is aligned with our
energy and that brings out the parts of
ourselves that we actually want to have
brought out in the world and those parts
of ourselves that are craving that
higher level more authentic discipline
will resist any authoritarian influence
we try to place on ourselves that
inhibits that Creative Energy so one way
to start getting in touch with yourself
in this way could be as simple as
journaling out on the days when you're
feeling stuck or resistant or
undisciplined what is it that I'm
wanting that I think I'm not allowed to
want or that I judge myself for wanting
what is that thing and can I be present
with it for a moment without judgment if
I want tons of rest can I just
acknowledge that even if I think
consciously I've had enough if I want a
big huge dose of social support and of
comfort and love can I acknowledge that
even if I think that I shouldn't need it
because our needs are there whether we
want them to be or not whether the judge
and jury inside of our conscious Minds
has decided that they should be there or
not those needs will persist and the way
to True discipline is through listening
to our needs incorporating them into the
structure of our overall life and then
acting in a way where our disciplined
actions actually meet our needs so
designing a life where the amount of
rest that we need is baked into it where
the amount of social support that we
need is baked into it because our
unconscious mind will find the time and
support we need if we do not do it
consciously so personally my entire life
and workflow changed when I accepted
that the 15ish hours per week that I
tended to spend sitting at my desk
procrastinating would be better devoted
to just going out and walking around the
city and getting lost in my thoughts for
15 hours a week deliberately
intentionally in a way that I baked into
my routine because my brain needed 15
hours on average of unstructured
thinking time per week in order to
perform well at my job so I could either
bake that into every day and
intentionally take a couple hours to do
that processing time or my mind would
take that time for me and I would sit at
my desk and waste time and of course
you're going to have to figure out here
what works for your schedule not
everyone has a high degree of
flexibility but the cool thing is that
when we're listening to our energy
and to what we actually need from
ourselves our brains tend to become very
creative in the problem solving and this
is a kind of magic trick that I feel
like I've stumbled on over the years
it's true in our relationship with
ourselves and it happens to also be true
in our relationships with other people
when all of the needs we have are put on
the table in a raw authentic
non-distorted way magic happens we start
to suddenly find Creative Solutions that
were not there when we were resisting
reality so in this quadrant down here we
get in touch with what we authentically
want what the needs that we have been
bullying are actually trying to fulfill
for us and then we start to move into
that exploration phase where we start
trying out different habits different
routines different jobs different
projects whatever it is that start to
get us
unstuck and at this point you probably
don't have a lot of discipline and you
probably shouldn't discipline is is the
product of finding something that
authentically works for us and choosing
to engage with that thing that works
over and over again in a way that leads
us somewhere we want to go with a high
degree of intentionality but before we
know what works for us getting really
disciplined about pretty much anything
is just going to be a direct path to
burnout so when we're at this part of
the process what we're doing is spending
a lot of quality time with ourselves and
this might be a point where it's really
helpful to do something like coaching in
particular the type of coaching that
helps us get in touch with our values
and our desires and what we want from
ourselves and our relationships and our
life it might be helpful to read
different books and explore different
concepts and see what resonates for us
what energizes us what we authentically
want to move toward love and curiosity
and Alignment are natural motivators and
so the more we get tuned into what do I
feel really interested in even if it's
it's not what I wish I was interested in
and what makes me feel really aligned
and Alive what allows me to show up the
most authentically and how can I keep
taking steps slowly in that direction
even if let's say the type of work that
really excites me is not the type of
work that I can do at an entrylevel
position is there a way I can take that
energy around the thing that excites me
and start applying it to whatever entry
level position is going to take me up
the ranks so which beginner steps
towards the type of job that I want are
going to feel really good while I am
taking them or if I want a long-term
romantic relationship which types of
people do I just enjoy connecting with
when the pressure is totally off or if I
want to start a new fitness regime or
work on some other personal goal what do
I just really enjoy in the process of
that and how can I just start taking
more steps in creative ways in that
Direction well noticing the whole time
what's working for me what's feeling
like a yes and an expansion of my
natural energy and what's feeling like a
hard no and a contraction of it and how
do I get really honest with myself the
entire way through on what I actually
want desire and love versus what I just
want to want or what my ego would like
me to do and the clearer we get on this
and the more we start moving towards the
things that we love the more discipline
starts to naturally form so now we start
looking at making that vertical move we
start noticing the intersection between
the things that we enjoy doing and the
things that get us the results we want
in the world or that move us towards a
goal that feels exciting for us we start
noticing the patterns of when our
resistance and exhaustion show up and we
make a practice out of figuring out how
to tend to those without shutting down
and burning out we work out this unique
dance around how we can stay both action
oriented and connected to ourselves
because again this is a skill you are
going to need the entire way through you
can be working your dream job for years
and be in flow and be aligned with it
and be getting things done and feeling
great about it and then something will
inevitably change even if it's just
boredom creeping in because the thing
that once worked for so long has now
become R and maybe part of why it once
felt so exciting was because you loved
the challenge and so we're going to need
to stay sharp in that self-attunement
piece so the idea is that by the time we
get here to this upper right part of the
quadrant where we have high discipline
and high self-attunement working towards
our goals feels like a kindness to
ourselves instead of having to bully
ourselves into action we can
authentically cheerlead ourselves into
action because the action does not
require us to self abandon on Route and
the framing I like to take around all of
this is that authentic acts of
discipline feel a lot more like devotion
like genuinely opening ourselves up to
being tuned into whatever parts of
ourselves are already wanting to express
themselves and already wanting to be
actualized and devotion even on the hard
days feels more enticing than in action
because it's part of a bigger hole that
keeps us feeling feeling proud of
ourselves and aligned with ourselves and
when we have that as an option that's
available to us it's generally a much
more attractive option than giving up
hanging back and phoning it in is
because we also understand that we need
to give ourselves rest breaks time to
recharge when we have baked all of that
into our strategy that we stay
disciplined about we find ourselves
falling off the wagon a lot less because
the discipline system we created for
ourselves is Not Fragile now this of
course is a lifelong process it never
ends this process of learning to be
attuned with ourselves and honest with
ourselves and to take steps in the
direction of those authentic wants is a
dance that we will be doing for the rest
of our lives so it's very worthwhile to
learn the steps as best you can but the
most important thing to keep in mind is
that if you find yourself bullying
yourself speaking down to yourself about
what you think you should be doing what
might be most helpful is actually to
slow that process down and to go before
I move into discipline can I spend a
little bit more time with empathy and
Attunement and
self-standing so that when discipline
naturally arises I know that I will not
just be setting myself up for Burnout
down the road I will be setting myself
up for an increasingly generative
experience all right that's all I'm
going to say for today on this topic as
always I'm very curious any thoughts
feelings responses questions that are
coming up for you please leave them in
the comment section of this video I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]