hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
today on this channel we're going to be
talking about the inner critic so the
inner critic is a term that you usually
hear in connection with complex PTSD or
toxic shame and it refers to the part of
our minds that give us this kind of
onslaught of negative or critical
thoughts about ourselves and you don't
have to have complex PTSD or toxic shame
to have an inner critic everyone one has
this to an extent and that's actually
something we're going to talk about in
this video different manifestations of
the inner critic and how some of them
can actually be quite helpful and some
of them are quite destructive and today
the reason we're talking about this
through the lens of cptsd and toxic
shame is because that tends to be the
most destructive form of inner critic
when we have toxic shame there is a tiny
voice inside of our heads that
relentlessly lets us know that who we
are as people is shameful and bad and
wrong and that if anyone really saw who
we were at our core they wouldn't want
anything to do with us inside the mind
of the toxically shamed individual the
inner critic is the part of your mind
that is constantly monitoring the way
that you are coming off to other people
and it's giving you feedback on how you
can appear to be more perfect because
your inner critic has internalized based
on your early environment that the the
way to get love and acceptance or at the
least the way to not get brutally
rejected is to make yourself seem as
Flawless as possible and the inner
critic constantly keeps track of all of
the ways in which you are not yet
perfect and it lets you know what those
are in hopes that you will listen to its
feedback and get good enough to deserve
human
connection now of course the inner
critic is wrong about what it is telling
you human connection does not require
you to be perfect and in fact the most
deep and resilient forms of human
connection actually come through sharing
our vulnerabilities and our struggles
with people but this is not something
that comes naturally to you if you have
toxic shame or
cptsd and so before you can get to that
place where you're in touch with your
own vulnerabilities and able to connect
with other people on them we first need
to talk about how to work with that
critic and how to start repurposing that
inner critic so that they are working
for you and helping the more authentic
parts of you get what they want out of
your life as opposed to chronically
trying to push those parts away and
focus only on your image so when I
started learning about complex PTSD I
remember reading about the inner critic
and going well yeah I have that everyone
has that right everyone has a little
voice inside their head that criticizes
them all the time and I kind of put the
concept aside and didn't think too much
about it it and then it wasn't until
many years later when I'd done a lot of
healing work that I kind of returned to
this term because something I started
noticing the healthier I got was that
whenever I would go through tough times
in my life so when something challenging
would happened to me when I was going
through pain or grief I would get
intensely self-critical seemingly out of
nowhere I would be doing perfectly fine
and feeling relatively emotionally
stable but then for whatever reason any
any time I was really struggling I would
become obsessed with being more and more
perfect when I kind of returned to this
term inner critic and went yeah my inner
critic comes super online for some
reason when I am struggling in my life
that feels kind of backwards and this
was the point when it really clicked in
for me I have this belief inside of my
body and mind that I can only get help
care or connection from other people if
I am absolutely perfect this part of me
is not actually trying to make my life
better per se what it's trying to do is
make me look perfect to the outside
world because it believes that if I am
acting perfect I deserve care and right
now because I'm struggling my body knows
I need a lot of care and so what we're
going to explore in this video is two
things one we're going to talk about how
to work with that short-term term
experience of needing care and
connection because we're struggling and
our inner critic coming online telling
us you can only get that once you're
perfect so we're going to talk about how
to start breaking some of the inner
critics rules when and where we can and
we're also going to talk about how to
sit down with that inner critic and have
a conversation with it about which
long-term goals we want it to be holding
us to because the inner critic is simply
the part of our minds that is trying to
hold us to the things that we have
decided are important to us as strange
as it sounds it's a part of us that
really loves us and is trying to see us
succeed and so over time in the long
term as we work with the inner critic
what we want to make sure we're doing is
giving it better instructions about what
we want it to hold us accountable to so
instead of holding ourselves accountable
to Perfection we can start holding
ourselves accountable to things like
authenticity or whatever we have decided
is a truly meaningful goal for us in
life that genuinely makes our lives feel
better this is kind of the process of
repurposing the inner critics role in
our lives we have hired the right person
for the job we have just given them the
wrong instructions now if you have
complex PTSD and or toxic shame it's
likely that you don't have much of a
concept of constructive criticism you
might think that all criticism is
inherently either worthless or
absolutely shameful to the core and the
reason you might think that is because
when you are very young you learn to
split yourself off into your true self
so the part of you that holds your real
feelings and vulnerabilities and your
false self the self that you show to the
world and because that's the part of
yourself that is most often out in the
world interacting with other people and
getting feedback you probably haven't
gotten a lot of feedback in your life
that actually feels meaningful to you at
the core because the core of who you are
is hidden from the world so it's not
possible for anybody to give you
valuable feedback on that in your early
environment you were encouraged to and
rewarded when you behaved perfectly and
rejected or punished when you let your
true Messier more raw feelings out and
so most of the criticism you received
early on in life probably was truly not
constructive it was destructive to your
core author autic Cel because it was
implicitly telling you things like hide
who you are and work really hard on
developing an image that is not you so
criticism might feel inherently
threatening to your body when you start
thinking about it because you assume
that you're getting told how to improve
your fake image and hide the real stuff
away and so what we're going to be
working on here is getting familiar with
the term constructive criticism and what
it actually means when we have
constructive criticism what that means
is that we're receiving feedback on how
to be more of our authentic selves and
how we can do a better job at operating
from the core of ourselves which is the
part of you that you might currently
think people want to see the least of
but when we learn to repurpose that
inner critic to actually help us get
more of what we want in life the new
instructions we're going to be giving
them our instructions on helping us stay
more authentic and helping us cope more
and more of that part of ourselves that
we have hidden away into existence and
showing it to the rest of the world in a
way that does not overload us with shame
and when we do this we avoid that
downward spiral because when we're
struggling and we're needing help and
care and support and the advice that we
are giving ourselves is detach from your
feelings and become more and more
perfect as far as the outside world is
concerned that's going to start zapping
our energy and causing more and more
disregulation as we work over time to
suppress our feelings when our feelings
need the most care and attention and so
a constructive inner critic is like a
parent who has taken the time to really
get to know who you authentically are
and can give you really loving and
thoughtful advice about what actions you
might want to take in order to get more
of what you authentically want out of
your life and to express yourself more
confid confidently and freely in the
world so a healthy inner critic like a
healthy inner parent keeps you
accountable to the things that feel
healthy and growing for you at your core
and they also help you stay connected to
your strengths when the conditions of
your life get challenging and turbulent
so a healthy inner critic is not keeping
your nose to the grindstone because they
want you to look perfect they are
lovingly sitting with you as you uphold
your commitments during challenging
times because those things feel like
resource points so once again a healthy
inner critic is like a secure parent who
loves you enough to give you meaningful
structure in your life based on the
things you and your authentic self and
your authentic feelings have decided are
right for you so how do we get to that
place the first step in this process is
noticing when our inner critic is online
because for most of us we don't think of
it in these terms right we don't think
oh my inner critic is showing up we
think why do I look so ugly nobody is
ever going to love me I need to go on a
diet and get a skincare routine we think
I don't make enough money nobody is ever
going to take me seriously in the world
I need to find 10 different Paths of
income sources tomorrow right we're not
thinking of this in terms of I'm having
critical thoughts we're just taking the
critical thoughts as truth without
questioning them and so that is Step One
is when we have those thoughts can we
try to observe them and notice when
we're feeling particularly stressed or
self-critical my inner critic is online
right now they're online because they
think that they are helping me right now
and it can actually be helpful in this
case to follow the inner critics line of
thought just a little bit so to ask the
inner critic if I did everything you
said where do you think that would take
me and you might kind of get an idea if
you just follow that line of thinking if
I got super fit and hot
what would happen well then maybe I
think I would feel connected to people I
would finally open up my energy and be
willing to welcome in love because I
would consider myself finally good
enough to do that or let's say I started
making tons of money then I would be
able to hold myself with confidence and
pride in the world because I would
finally be the kind of person who
deserved respect and when you can get to
that place that place where you're
touching into the feeling that you
believe you will get if you follow the
inner critics rules perfectly now you're
aware of what feeling you need in the
present right forget all the in between
stuff I now know either I'm craving love
intimacy and connection or confidence
pride and the ability to respect myself
that's good information to have it tells
us information about what is currently
missing for us psychologically that's
really important for keeping us in
Balance so this is about sitting with
those critical thoughts without letting
them sink in and just noticing what
feeling they are trying to lead you
towards in the future and the immediate
thought that follows that might be well
I'm not allowed to need that I'm not
good enough to need that I can't have
permission to need that that's how the
inner critic speaks to us but the ironic
part is that the need is already there
that is how humans work we don't work to
get ourselves to a certain place and
then our needs come online though that's
how it feels when you have complex PTSD
that you deserve to have needs once you
get to a certain level of accomplishment
we just have needs no matter who we are
or where we're at in life having needs
is normal and I just want to take a
moment to really let that sink in in
these moments when you're inner critic
is spiraling out of control and telling
you that you don't deserve to have needs
remember you can't control it if you
feel like you need something you need it
you don't need to get yourself to a
place to deserve that need you just have
it because you are human and it really
doesn't hurt to remind yourself of that
as often as you can needs just naturally
arise as the product of having a human
body so that's step one noticing when
the inner critic is online and if we can
trying to get at what our need is step
two this is something we want to start
drawing some awareness to noticing who
our inner critic sounds like so does
this voice sound like your authentic
self telling you what you really want
and feeding back to you strategies to
get it or does it sound more like one of
your parents or someone else in your
early life who is very critical of you
do they tend to be shaming you and
pushing you in the direction of doing
things that honestly on a very authentic
level you just don't want to do or don't
care about so is your inner critic
really oriented towards the things you
think you should want or do with your
life versus are they pointing you in
directions that actually feel really
fruitful and meaningful and this can
take some time to root out so don't
worry if you're kind of confused or
muddled around that it will become
clearer the more you practice working
with the inner critic but the important
part here is to just notice whose voice
is that really in your head is it yours
or is it a combination of authority
figures you've interacted with over the
years who actually didn't know the
authentic you very well because if
that's the case it's highly likely that
they're not going to be giving you
advice that's going to make your life
actually feel more meaningful and
grounded in the long term they're going
to be giving you advice that only serves
to help you improve your image to the
outside world the reason it's really
important and fruitful to think about
who your inner critic sounds like is
because that often points you in the
direction of which people in your life
living or dead you might need to do some
work around kind of cutting
psychological cords with or emotional
cords with so if your inner critic
sounds a lot like your father or an
early teacher that you had in life maybe
that's someone who you really need to do
some work around differentiating
yourself from and coming to understand
that you don't need to live up to their
ideals in order to be okay
and that's its own process that we're
not going to go too far into today I
just wanted to point out that this can
give us valuable information about who
we're still kind of emotionally and
psychologically in mesh with and what we
want to start thinking about is what
would it sound like if that inner critic
instead of sounding like an early
authority figure sounded more like our
higher selves so a version of ourselves
that we had a lot of respect for who was
integrated who cared about our feelings
and who actually wanted the best for us
the secret version of ourselves that we
keep hidden from the world what would it
sound like to have our inner critic
rooting for that person and that's what
we want to start keeping in our
awareness as we go through the next
steps so when we're in that place of
noticing that our inner critic has come
online and we have that awareness around
it the next thing we want to do is
divide our kind of thinking around it in
two ways so one we want to look at what
what are my short-term needs that my
inner critic has come online in response
to so what need do I have that my inner
critic is misguidedly trying to make me
worthy of having and getting fulfilled
that need points to something important
that we want to tend to and we also want
to start thinking about in the long term
which goals would actually feel really
meaningful for me to work towards from
an authentic place in me or what things
actually help me through the challenging
seasons of life and those are the
directions we want to start feeding to
our inner critic to give it better
advice about how to coach us when we're
down and we need some extra coaching so
for example at this point in my life
when I'm feeling down or really
struggling and my inner critic comes
online though I do sometimes still
struggle with it giving me kind of
advice in the direction of perfection
more often than not what my inner critic
is being strict with me about is you
need to go engage with your community
when you are struggling you need to not
isolate yourself you need to keep
yourself connected to the projects in
your life that you feel passionate about
and that keep you connected to the world
outside of your own mind so my inner
critic has internalized the things that
it has learned are genuinely important
to me as an authentic human being and
it's coaching me in the direction of
keeping in connection with those things
when I find myself struggling in life so
we're now developing more awareness
about both our short and long-term needs
and what we're going to focus on in the
short term is finding ways to get those
needs met without dying of Shame and in
the long term we're going to be thinking
about how we can get those needs met in
a more consistent way so that we don't
end up in these places where we have
heavily neglected what matters to us and
then finding ourselves in crisis over it
so the next step in this process is
looking at our short-term needs so that
need for care and connection or that
need for confidence and respect for
ourselves the first thing we want to do
is contextualize for ourselves the fact
that it's okay to have needs and I know
we already touched on that but this
Bears repeating because this can be so
hard to get through to ourselves when we
have toxic shame or cptsd it is very
normal to have needs everybody has them
and in fact if it feels like you have
more needs than average person that
might be true because you have cptsd or
toxic shame and that is an inherently
disregulated experience so if you feel
like you struggle more than the average
person that might be true but it's not
because you're weak or shameful or wrong
it's because you have drama and if
anything you deserve more care and
support than the average person because
you're in more pain and so again we just
really want to put put some attention on
normalizing the fact that we have pain
or feelings or needs for
ourselves and then we want to look at
are there ways for me to get this need
met in the near future without
absolutely dying of Shame and that
part's really important we don't want to
overload ourselves here it might feel
really hard for you to ask for help
around things so it's okay if you can't
do it yet but if you can it's important
to give yourself permission
to spend some time and energy and
resource on getting that need met so
maybe you're really struggling in your
work and you're too ashamed to talk to
anybody about it and you just can't seem
to work through that shame trigger yet
is it possible for you to hire someone
online to talk to you about your work
challenges for an hour would that feel
less shameful or if you can't seem to
find a way to get that need met for
co-regulation or support or whatever it
is you can simp put a pin in it and let
yourself know it's good that I have an
awareness of this need even if I don't
know how to solve it yet and you can
kind of keep the case File open as you
go through life can you start noticing
opportunities to get that need met more
consistently so I remember when I was
doing a lot of healing work around this
stuff kind of a problem I was tracking
was that I didn't have a lot of
friendships where I felt like I was
being my authentic self I was really
really good at making friends from my
kind of social social Mass but I really
only had one friend at a certain point
who I could truly be myself with and
then anytime I needed co-regulation but
that person wasn't available I would
find myself feeling kind of depressed
and I just pinned that as a problem for
about a year and I started working
intentionally on slowly building out my
social network and investing more and
more in friendships where I felt like I
could bring my authentic self to the
table and at various points I checked
back in when I would hit that point
where I needed that co-regulation or
support and I would ask myself how am I
doing in the department of expanding my
social network and every time I checked
in I had a little bit more co-regulation
available to me outside of that
friendship until I got to a point where
I was almost never in a place where I
needed co-regulation and couldn't find
it at least within the next couple of
days but when I first checked in on that
need I had no way to fulfill it so this
is the art of keeping the case open once
we recognize what our needs are and
being willing to slowly build a network
over time that will help us get that
need met more consistently so that the
next time we find ourselves stuck around
it we have somewhere to go and this
bleeds into the last point which is
helping the inner critic work better for
us long term so the frame shift that's
really helped me here is instead of
thinking about what do I need to keep
myself disciplined around so what do I
need to just kind of force myself to do
whether I want to or not because that's
usually a framework that I'm operating
from when I'm geared towards
perfectionism as opposed to authentic
self-development instead I want to start
thinking about what do I love so much
that I want to stay devoted to it even
when it's hard so taking care of my
mental and physical health is something
I care about enough to stay devoted to
it even during the rough periods
so that's something I can start tasking
my inner critic with when I'm struggling
in life can you start being strict with
me about making sure that I am tending
to my emotional mental and physical
health I need to be strict with myself
about that if I'm feeling depressed I
need to be strict with myself about
seeing friends three to four times a
week if I'm feeling unhealthy and
lethargic and low energy I need to be
strict with myself about eating well and
getting enough sleep if I'm feeling
cynical and depressed can I spend some
time sitting down with myself and
figuring out what's going on in my
emotional world that might need some
loving care and attention is there
something I might need to grieve so over
time the more aware of our own needs we
become and the less we shame ourselves
for having those needs the more we can
give that information to that inner
critic who we are repurposing to be more
of a wise and caring inner parent and
start being held accountable to the
things that we actually want from our
lives things like a healthy thriving
community of people who genuinely know
us for who we are and who support us in
becoming more
ourselves work that we actually feel
really connected to and devoted to that
makes a bad day better not worse
routines and habits and ways of
structuring our life that actually Keeps
Us feeling emotionally satisfied rather
than drained and depleted and I do have
a video on that about how to Foster more
meaningful discipline in your life
that's probably a really nice compliment
to this one so I will drop it in the
description of this video and you might
want to check that one out next but for
now I think that's all I have to say for
today on the inner critic and how to
work with and repurpose that part of
your mind that is observing yourself and
giving you feedack back in order to make
that feedback more meaningful and to
help yourself actually start to flourish
through hard times rather than
disconnecting from yourself further and
further the harder your life gets as
always if you have any questions
comments things that have been coming up
for you as you've gone through this
video please do leave them in the
comment section below I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and I will see you back
here again
really soon
[Music]