hey guys heidi preeve here first of all
welcome to my channel if you are new on
this channel we talk about all things
personality types as well as attachment
theory and basically any system that
helps us understand both ourselves and
other people better as well as
sorry my light is doing this thing where
it's just like strobe lighting on its
own i guess it's just going to do that
in and out of this video like it just
kind of
it just kind of flashes into like a
softer light and then back into an
electric one i don't know what it's
doing and i'm also too lazy to fix it so
the light is gonna be chaotic through
this video i apologize anyway what we
talk about on this channel is not just
how to understand ourselves and others
but how to bridge those gaps so that we
can have healthier and happier
relationships and today i want to talk
about something really important but
rarely discussed which is what to do
when you have let's say gotten hijacked
by an emotional flashback or had a tough
moment with your attachment style where
you blew up at someone or where you
neglected to deal with someone's
emotions in a way that really hurt the
other person i think that so many of us
just default to shame and hiding
ourselves away and trying to kind of
push everything under the rug once we
realize that we have done something bad
or that we have lost control of our
emotions in some way and i want to use
this video to provide a better
alternative to that because it
absolutely will happen as you move
through the attachment healing process
no questions asked not only will you get
new things wrong as you learn new
responses but you will also become much
more aware than you ever have been of
how many things you have been getting
wrong or how many ways in which you have
accidentally been hurting people that
you might not have been aware of until
you started the attachment healing
process so in that way healing can be a
very mixed blessing earlier this year i
guess last year i did a video called
what to do when you realize that you are
the toxic person and i do not like the
term toxic person i don't think that's a
thing but what we talked a lot about in
that video was what to do when your own
sense of shame gets in the way of you
behaving kindly and fairly towards other
people and so this is kind of what this
is going to be about as well what to do
in the situations where you realize that
your own ego or perhaps your own
dysregulated emotional system got in the
way of you considering other people's
needs and feelings so i'm just gonna
dive into it so step number one is
simply stopping and noticing that you
have behaved badly and that you have
noticed it now this sounds too simple
but it's actually a really incredible
step when you start to notice and become
mindful of the fact that you are not
operating from a present state so what i
mean by a present state is that it is
totally fine to have emotions right i am
not in any situation trying to kind of
convince people to zen themselves out of
feeling anything i believe in fully
feeling things and i also believe in
expressing our emotions but there are
times and there are frequent times when
we are doing attachment healing work
where we become aware of the fact that
we have reacted to a present situation
with emotions from the past so maybe
there is a certain need we had neglected
very commonly as a child that now we
just want our partners to read our minds
and always know when we need it attended
to and we get really mad at them anytime
they aren't able to properly mind read
we might be really quick to blow up or
maybe we get upset with our partners for
not giving us enough space when we never
set explicit boundaries with them so
there are situations where we are
reacting to things from the past as if
they are happening in the present
without considering the actual context
of the present moment and if you are
able to recognize that that's what's
happening to you in this moment you are
already much further along than you used
to be because most of us when we're
insecurely attached go our entire lives
reacting to things from the past and the
present and thinking that they are
accurate representations of the present
the fact that you are aware of the fact
that that is what you're doing means you
are now aware of where you have a blind
spot so you're now able to kind of trace
the situation back and look at which
things might lead you to a place where
you are not tuned into the present
moment and where your ability to reason
and make rational decisions is being
impacted so it's kind of ironic because
before we're able to do this we might
live in a state of blissful ignorance
where we get to blame all of our
problems on other people where we get to
make these projections and live in the
righteous anger of them and it feels on
some level pretty good to do that right
feeling righteously angry is this
terrible feeling it's terrible for the
soul but it's great for the ego but once
you are able to put that righteous anger
down and recognize i'm not reacting
appropriately to this situation the
first thing that might come to your mind
is like oh i'm such a piece of crap oh
i'm doing my thing again oh i'm never
going to get this right so self-berating
thoughts are likely to follow that
awareness but ironically you are
actually taking the first step out of
your old reaction patterns and that is a
wonderful thing right so actually i want
to as much as possible encourage you to
actually congratulate yourself in those
moments if you have caught yourself in a
bad reaction it means that you have
necessarily made progress because you
have a new level of awareness developing
right you used to be acting badly and
not know that you're acting badly now
you're acting badly and knowing you're
acting badly the next step of course is
acting in a way that is situation
appropriate and being aware that you're
acting in a way that's situation
appropriate but you can't get there
without being where you currently are
right it's a rung on the ladder so don't
beat yourself up for being here you are
taking a necessary step towards the next
step now step two take a beat and find
the help you need you might not always
be able to source the help that you need
right away so i don't know if you're
watching this video five minutes after
blowing up at someone let's say or two
weeks after having a reaction to
something that you're only now realizing
hmm maybe that wasn't about the thing
that i thought it was about at the time
but what i want to encourage you to do
actually is do not move directly to
apologies move directly to communicating
what you need so if you're in a conflict
situation with someone and you start to
realize ooh i'm having a really strong
fight or flight response that i don't
think it's going to be helpful if i
continue this interaction in that state
you can tell the other person i need a
beat i need an hour or 24 hours or
whatever it is that you truly need to
calm back down and return to yourself
but in that time rather than rushing
into a fond response as soon as you
realize that you've done something wrong
name the problem and try to be as
accurate as possible write down
everything that happened with absolutely
no filtering lying or omitting what
happened and look at it as data do not
judge yourself do not try to pick
yourself apart just figure out exactly
what you're working with get it all
recorded somewhere and then figure out
what resource you're going to need to
access in order to help you make sense
of it you could bring the experience
into a 12-step group you could bring it
into the therapy room you could journal
about it you could find books or
resources for helping you navigate the
difficult emotions that you were going
through but until you can name it and
you can name it as accurately as
possible it's going to be very difficult
for you to understand what needs to
happen differently in order for you to
not react in that same way and before
you know what has to happen differently
in order for the behavior to stop you
should not be offering apologies because
apologies without a genuine intent to
change and do things differently in the
future are at best simply an expression
of remorse but at worst manipulations
because you're kind of going to someone
and saying hey i realize that i did
something badly i'm going to behave
differently in the future but if you
know in your gut that you are kind of
out of control of that response it's
probably a lie for you to tell someone
that you're going to do things
differently in the future so this leads
me to point number three which is that
absolutely it is great to apologize when
we have done something wrong but make
sure your apologies are measured and
honest so do not over promise
particularly when we have attachment
wounding we are dealing with very deeply
ingrained patterns that we've probably
been operating out of from the time we
were a newborn infant it takes more time
than one bad fight and a 10 minute
period of reflection for us to be able
to go back and rewire that way of
operating often it takes years but what
people tend to think is if i behave
badly i absolutely have to promise to do
something drastically different in order
to save the relationship but what you're
going to end up doing if you do not have
a truly holistic solution to that
problem in a given moment is lead
someone on into thinking that it's not
going to happen again if it is a
behavior that comes from a place of deep
wounding is likely to happen again so
the way to make an apology and i might
make a whole video just on this is by
taking a 360 degree view of the
situation and being able to show it to
the other person so that they understand
which boundaries they might need to draw
in order to keep your relationship
healthy now this might be difficult to
do it might feel like you are losing out
on a part of a relationship that feels
really important to you but the thing to
keep in mind is that boundaries both
that we place with other people and that
other people place with us actually
allow our relationship to flourish right
because if you're constantly in conflict
in a way that is not getting you
anywhere it's not pushing your
relationship forward it is pushing you
further away from where you want to be
so what you want to do if you're ready
to apologize and take ownership over
behaviors you've done that have affected
someone else is be completely and
totally honest when you give that
apology so you can express remorse tell
them that you see how your behavior
affected them or hurt them and that you
feel very deep pain over it that in
retrospect you wish you had acted
differently but also you are dealing
with an attachment wound or with
unresolved trauma or with some aspect of
your psychology that you do not yet have
resolved and you can work with the other
person to talk about which types of
situations tend to trigger you in that
way how you might be able to put some
kind of safety cones in your
relationship so that you know if there's
a difficult conversation you need to
have you're going to be able to have it
without certain triggers definitely
going off for you and what you really
have to be willing to do at this step is
acknowledge what you have not yet healed
from and that does not mean that you
have to feel shame over it if anything
it is an incredibly adult and
responsible thing to be aware of which
wounds are still active in you and set
interpersonal boundaries that keep your
relationship safe from the fallout of
those wounds so as strong as the
temptation might be to go to someone and
say this is never going to happen again
if you do that enough times in a row and
it keeps happening again and again what
you're going to do is lose that person's
trust
if you go to someone and say i don't
want this to ever happen again which is
probably 100 true
but it might here's why can we talk
about how to set some boundaries in our
relationships and in the way that we
respond to conflict that decrease the
likelihood of this happening again or
happening consistently and i guarantee
you that type of apology particularly if
this is a pattern of behavior is
probably going to be a lot more soothing
to the other person than an apology with
no action plan behind it or with an
idealized or unrealistic action plan
behind it what people want is to know
that they will be emotionally safe in
their relationships right so if you can
provide them with an opportunity to
interact with the truth and people know
when they're interacting with the truth
they can feel it you know that is
showing them a great deal of respect it
is offering them the opportunity to set
boundaries for themselves that will
allow your relationship to stay intact
and that is a process of both honoring
yourself and the other person and that's
a really special thing to do in
relationships it's a building block for
trust so as intimidating as it might
feel and as much as you might want to go
directly into fawn response after you've
done something that you perceive to be
wrong try not to if you can help it
because the fawn response is just
another part of the fight or flight
system that's activated and usually our
fighter flight or fauna freeze responses
are only helpful for getting us out of
short-term high-intensity situations
they're not as helpful when it comes to
long-term relationship building that's
when we really need to use our critical
thinking skills our self-awareness
skills and being able to communicate to
someone what we're dealing with and how
we plan to go about it in a way that
does not harm our relationship again is
the epitome of using those higher level
thinking skills that ultimately help us
quite a bit more in the long run so step
number four is something that actually
you could do before step three maybe
this should have been step three but
it's set boundaries with yourself and be
as realistic about those boundaries as
you were with the other person so if you
tell yourself i'm never going to behave
like this again i'm never going to get
angry like that again i am never going
to reject or be cruel towards my partner
like that again it's possible you're
idealizing the situation right you are
thinking about how you will behave in a
high pressure intense situation at a
time when you are in a low pressure
situation and you are feeling regulated
you have to be aware that there is a
difference between your triggered
activated self and your untriggered
regulated self and you have to find ways
to set boundaries around your own
behavior accounting for the fact that
you probably will get that triggered
again it is highly likely i would say
almost guaranteed that if you have
consistently dealt with triggers over
the course of your life recognizing that
you're triggered one time does not mean
that you will never have a trigger again
it probably means you're developing
great self-awareness and that you're
going to be able to start working with
those triggers more consistently but it
definitely does not mean that you will
never have that happen again so if you
choose to you can use this experience as
data to help you unpack what brought
that trigger on how you can avoid that
trigger in the future or if it goes off
what you will do instead of the behavior
that you want to avoid so i have certain
triggers where i know that if they get
to a certain threshold and i'm
interacting with someone and i'm trying
to solve the problem interpersonally
rather than attending to the trigger
itself first and foremost i will almost
definitely get very angry in a very
unproductive way i think anger can be a
great tool for resolving situations but
often when we're triggered and we're
reacting to a past situation in the
present that is not the time to express
our anger because we'll be expressing a
type of unresolvable anger and that's
often at least for me a sign that you
are dealing with a trauma trigger rather
than having a true genuine anger
response to the situation that you're in
so for myself i know that when i get
that feeling of insatiable anger where
the problem that's in the present
getting solved would not stop the anger
i need to leave the situation i need to
go be on my own i need to be in a
different room i need to read or run or
do something that is going to help me
calm my physiological state down and
that is a boundary i have with myself i
will not continue to interact with
someone once i'm triggered do i always
follow that boundary perfectly no but am
i capable of following it enough of the
time that it has made a significant
positive improvement in my close
relationships absolutely so step four of
this process is unpacking what happened
in a situation where you behaved in a
way you're not proud of in order to
figure out what triggers might have been
present and how you can set a boundary
around that trigger for yourself in the
future step number five and this might
not be what you're expecting but it is
probably the most important part of the
process figure out which ways this
behavior has been or currently is
adaptive for you figure out what need it
is meeting in your life and then figure
out a way to get that need met elsewhere
so people's first response to this one
is usually this is not serving any
purpose it's not meeting any need it is
purely destructive behavior that
could be true it could be the case that
this was once adaptive for you and it is
no longer adaptive however normally when
we have behaviors that are adaptive in
our childhood we tend to at least in
some small way recreate the conditions
of our childhood inner adulthood so that
our behavior is appropriate to the
situation and this is done largely
unconsciously and accidentally but it's
highly likely that if you are
continuously behaving in a certain way
that you feel like it's not getting you
anywhere it might actually be getting
you somewhere that you're not
consciously aware of so let's say you
grew up in a very chaotic home
environment there is always shouting and
yelling and screaming matches and now as
an adult you are constantly in
relationships where you are yelling and
shouting and having screaming matches
with your partner you might feel like
this is maladaptive it's not getting me
anywhere and i don't want this behavior
but if you have chosen a partner who has
that same model of relationships that
you have it's highly possible even
likely that the fighting and screaming
and raging is actually in some respects
keeping you together because you are
matching each other's model of what a
relationship looks like that person
might not know how to be in a
relationship where there is not constant
conflict and maybe you don't know either
so the fact that you are in conflict all
the time might actually be something
that is holding you guys together
without you realizing it this is not to
say continue to stay adapted to an
unhealthy situation but it is to say
that if there is an adaptive nature to
the behavior that you want to get rid of
you are likely to encounter extreme
unconscious resistance to changing the
behavior because it's actually getting
you somewhere if you unconsciously feel
like dropping this behavior is going to
lose my romantic relationship you are
probably going to experience a lot of
anxiety around any attempt to drop that
behavior or maybe you're someone who
bottles up all of your needs hell they
come out screaming all at once and so
actually having big explosive fights is
your only means of getting your needs
seen and met in that case there's going
to be a part of you that actually kind
of needs to start fights sometimes
because you have no alternate way of
getting your needs seen and met so what
you need to do is sit down and really
hypothesize throw out as many possible
things as you can think of until one
feels true in your bones about how this
behavior that you really want to get rid
of on a conscious level might actually
be serving you on an unconscious level
and once you do that you can figure out
how to get that unconscious need met in
another more productive way so that you
can cease the behavior in this area and
that is a long process i do highly
recommend the book how we change in 10
reasons why we don't by ross allen horn
it is one of my all-time favorite books
and it talks very specifically about
this why when there are behaviors that
we want so badly to get rid of we often
can't because unconsciously we're
benefiting from that behavior so that
book will help you kind of pick it apart
in a lot more detail if this is a step
that you find particularly difficult to
navigate
but the first thing to be aware of is
simply that you might not be
self-sabotaging you might actually be
doing a behavior that is adaptive that
has severe consequences on a conscious
level and that's a problem that needs to
be solved in a very specific way all
right that is kind of all i have to say
about this process i could go on forever
but what i want you to really keep in
mind is that if you are at the point
where you are starting to really notice
on a conscious level what you are doing
that is hurting other people that is
getting in the way of your healing that
is preventing you from having the
healthy and happy relationships that you
want to have and you can actually
recognize which of those responses are
yours alone to own you're already
probably in a much better place than you
think you are we heal from a place of
self-responsibility where we can go even
if the other person is truly behaving
badly it is my responsibility to set
boundaries around myself and protect
myself from that type of behavior so if
you are in that place of
self-responsibility you are already
probably a lot further along than you
think you are
okay as always let me know if you guys
have any questions in the comments i
love you i hope you are taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again really soon