hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today I'm coming to you
from the most brightly lit Corner that I
could find in the hotel room I'm
currently staying in and it felt like
the right time to make a video that I've
been thinking about making for quite
some time so shortly I'm going to be
attending the wedding of two people who
I think are beautifully well suited to
each other which is always a wonderful
thing to witness and I wanted to address
what the difference is between
compatibility so two people whose
Lifestyles and personalities and values
just naturally align versus limerence
which is a topic that we cover
extensively on this channel so if you
don't know what I mean when I say the
word limerence I will link a video in
the description of this one where I go
over what it is and how you can
recognize it but today what I
predominantly want to do is make some
distinctions between the feeling of
meeting someone who you are super
compatible with and excited about versus
experiencing limerence or romantic
Obsession now a comment I frequently get
when I post videos about limerence is
some version of isn't this just normal
at the beginning of a relationship to
feel like the sun shines out of
someone's butt and you can see none of
their flaws is that not just the
honeymoon period And I think that that's
a fair enough question so today I want
to go over some of the questions you
might want to ask yourself if you know
that you are someone who is prone to
limerence to distinguish whether you are
just happy about a new relationship or a
New Prospect or whether a developing
crush is kind of falling into limerence
territory so there's this tweet that I
remember going viral I think earlier
this year that said a crush is just a
lack of information and that's actually
kind of the premise that I want to base
this video on so when we first meet
someone who we have a romantic interest
in it is of course natural to fill in a
few of the blanks with fantasy and to do
a little bit of imagining around what it
might look like to be with that person
but for the rest of this video I'm gonna
break down how someone who is
approaching a crush from a secure I'm
okay you're okay worldview would fill in
those kind of blanks differently as they
get to know someone than someone who is
developing limerence would so I actually
think there's a lot of Truth to that
tweet right when we have a crush on
someone it's often because we don't know
that much about them yet and we're
thinking about them in a very favorable
way now the main difference here is that
those who air more secure are going to
go about filling in the blanks of what
they don't know about their Crush in a
very realistic and measured way versus
someone developing limerence is likely
to strategically select pieces of
information in the getting to know
someone process that fits their Fantasy
around that person and unconsciously
reject all evidence that does not fit
their fantasy of that person so without
further Ado we're going to go into five
questions I encourage you to ask
yourself that might help you pinpoint
whether you're just forming the basis of
a long-term highly compatible love
relationship or whether you're in the
early or mid stages of developing
limerence so question number one in my
opinion this is the most important one
how big is the gap between the way that
you think of your relationship in your
mind versus the relationship that exists
with this person in reality and as a
kind of litmus test for this how would
you feel if you had to confess to your
crush all of the fantasies you have
about them inside of your mind literally
picture yourself doing that and see what
comes up and the reason this serves as a
relatively good litmus test for
limerence is because if you're
non-liminant so if you're at the
beginning of getting to know someone in
a relatively secure way the way that you
think of this person is likely to not be
too many steps ahead of where you are in
reality so if you've had one or two
dates with them and you're coming at the
relationship from a more secure place
it's likely that the things you're
imagining are what you're going to talk
about on your third date you might have
some kind of questions around
compatibility or what they want how out
of a relationship or whatever it is but
what you're unlikely to be spending a
lot of time doing at this stage if
you're coming at it once again from a
more secure place is spending a lot of
time on fantasies that exist way in the
future and feeling kind of attached to
those fantasies already right so if I've
had one coffee date with someone but I
walk away from that date with some
elaborate fantasy about us getting
married in a foreign country in a hot
air balloon while string quartet is
playing from a hot air balloon that's
hovering nearby I would probably be
pretty embarrassed to let that person
know that that's what my thoughts are
focusing on however if I'm approaching
the relationship from a more secure
place they're going to be natural
Curiosities that crop up about the
person but it probably wouldn't be that
weird if you had to let them know that
those were the things you'd been
thinking about if you have been
obsessively thinking about romantic
fantasies involving a person you've only
had one coffee date with it's likely
that those fantasies don't have all all
that much to do with the actual person
because you probably don't know the
actual person that well definitely not
well enough to predict how they would
behave if you were to spend the rest of
your life together after the air balloon
reaches the ground and you ride off into
the sunset for your honeymoon but let's
say you've been dating someone for
multiple years and you've gotten engaged
now it's probably not that weird to
disclose your wedding fantasies to them
because even if you know you can't
afford those things the level of
commitment that your relationship has
does reflect the fantasy you're having
so again there's no hard or fast rule
here yes it is normal even if you are
securely attached to have a few thoughts
and Fantasies around what a life might
look like with someone that's also just
part of the getting to know each other
process if what you're looking for is a
long-term relationship but I really
think the litmus test here does come
down to if they could peel open your
brain look inside and see the fantasies
that you've had about them would you
feel absolutely mortified because you've
kind of been objectifying them inside
your own mind or would you be like yeah
I wish you weren't looking at my
fantasies but there's nothing really off
the rails in there right nothing that
would make me want to kind of shrink
away and disappear
and what I want to make clear at this
point is that I'm not trying to shame
any of us for experiencing limerence in
a lot of cases it is a natural response
to early developmental wounding so just
because you might feel a sense of Shame
around the thought of someone looking
inside your brain and seeing your
romantic fantasies that doesn't mean
that you are shameful or there's
something wrong with you as a person
this is just about Discerning when we
are in reality versus when we are
feeling pretty disconnected with it in
our relationships with other people and
the end goal of this whole process is to
stay more in reality so that we can
develop healthier and more long-lasting
relationships with other people in
reality and part of that process
involves checking ourselves along the
way when it comes to certain patterns of
thinking about relationships that are
maybe more instinctual for us so
question number two to ask yourself if
you're trying to figure out is this
limerence or is it true love as you're
getting to know someone particularly in
the early stages ask yourself am I
genuinely open to finding out
information about this person person
that would disqualify them as a good
romantic partner for me or am I kind of
putting my blinders on and only seeing
what I want to see about this person the
latter thought pattern tends to be a
pretty strong indication that you're
experiencing limerence and I'll explain
why in a minute versus the former is a
very healthy pattern for developing true
intimacy so for people who air more
secure on the attachment Spectrum when
they meet a potential romantic partner
even though they might look a little bit
exciting and shiny at the beginning
they're keeping an open mind as they
move along and getting to know someone
around how compatible they are or are
not with that person because they have
that I'm okay you're okay worldview it
doesn't feel like the end of the world
if they get to know someone a bit and
then find out oh I'm a good person and
they're a good person but maybe there
are things we want that are different
that would make us incompatible as
long-term romantic Partners or maybe our
communication Styles don't Jive
particularly well or maybe this feels
more like a friend Vibe than a romantic
vibe there is this kind of commitment to
staying in reality and noticing green
lights or signs that you are compatible
with someone while paying equal
attention to red and yellow lights now
in contrast when you're developing
limerence I want to bring up again my
favorite Dorothy 10 off quote which is
that limerence is above all else mental
activity so it's less about sussing out
true compatibility in a relationship and
it's more about fueling our Fantasy Life
that we're using to self-regulate so
when we are getting to know someone but
limerence is online for us we are more
fixated on and attached to our fantasy
about a person than we are to the
relationship as it exists in real life
the relationship in real life for
someone who is limerent is more of a
jumping off point for Fantasy so it's
actually really easy to ignore a lot of
the red flags if your unconscious mind's
primary goal is remaining limerent
because seeing something that could
potentially develop into a major issue
down the line would really interrupt
your fantasy so you might be really
quick to kind of push out of your
awareness or ignore any red flags that
you see when you're developing limerence
you're not truly weighing them out in an
equal way and asking yourself would this
be a deal breaker down the road and if
so what does that mean about the way
that I need to approach the relationship
now if we want different things if we
have different values if our
communication isn't natural if I don't
like the way that it feels when we are
spending time together and prefer when
they go away and leave me alone to my
fantasy about them how seriously am I
taking all of those things as indicators
that the relationship is not a
particularly compatible one versus how
quickly do I want to forget about all
that stuff because it's actually not
that important what's important is the
way that I feel when I'm on my own
thinking about this relationship if that
feels like the most important thing it's
highly likely that what you're
experiencing is limerence rather than a
genuine openness to getting to know
someone new and waiting in until you
have enough information about your true
compatibility levels which often takes a
number of months to truly get deeply
emotionally invested that's going to be
a pretty big indicator of whether you're
experiencing limerence or the beginning
of Love third question to ask yourself
if you're trying to root out whether
this is limerence or love and this is
one that I see as kind of Downstream of
the last question so as you continue to
get to know this person and develop a
relationship with them ask yourself am I
aware of potential problems that might
arise out of this dynamic as well as
non-delusional means of solving those
problems so what do I mean by
non-delusional contrary to popular
belief people who are developing
limerence do tend to notice areas in
which their partner is not completely
compatible with them or perceived flaws
in their partner but those who are
limerent tend to idealize those problems
or flaws and the solutions to them as
opposed to those who are more in reality
in their relationship tips see their
problems as genuine problems that they
need to find solutions to so let's say
you and your partner want different
things let's say you want a family and
you find out that this person you're
getting to know does not want one a
non-liminant solution to that problem
might look like talking to them and
making it known to them that that's a
value of yours and checking out kind of
how set they are on that value or
whether it's something that's more of a
maybe for them and making sure you keep
that line of communication open as you
go with the awareness that if your
values diverge too much you might have
to end the relationship even if you
really like them in a limerent
relationship solutions to problems tend
to sound more like thought patterns that
go I will just love them for the first
time in a way that they've never been
loved and then they will open up and
change and see the beauty of love and
they will want different things than
they currently claim they're wanting so
a solution like this to a problem is not
based in reality because you're not
actually working out interpersonally
where your value different references
are and where things might break down
you're counting on kind of magic to
happen or maybe you're telling yourself
that these differences are not a big
issue because actually you've just
realized that all of your own wants and
needs don't matter and the only thing
you need to be happy is to be with this
person so you will just kind of throw
out what you wanted for your life and
just go along with whatever they want
because actually the only thing that's
important to you is the connection that
you have with this other person
thoughts like this tend to be based in
limerent patterning whereas insecure
relationships even in the excited kind
of honeymoon stages you stay grounded in
who you are and what you want and you
have an awareness of where those things
do and don't align with this other
person's wants and needs and you decide
in large part how much to emotionally
invest yourself in the relationship
based on those early and ongoing signs
of compatibility and when problems arise
in the relationship they feel painful if
you're coming at the relationship from a
secure place because it sucks to be out
of sync with someone who you really care
about but you're able to sit with that
pain and that discomfort for long enough
to find Solutions with the other person
to real problems as they come up versus
in limerence land any problems that
arise are generally romanticized a
fantasy solution is sourced and in real
life the problem goes unaddressed or in
some cases you might try to subtly
manipulate the other person into
behaving in a way that aligns with your
fantasy version of solving the problem
when in reality maybe you've never
actually talked to them about it
directly so once again insecure
relationships problems are acknowledged
the pain of them is felt and they're
usually brought up and dealt with
explicitly with the other person in
limerent or fantasy relationships
problems are romanticized or ignored or
delusional Solutions come into the mix
to allow you to stop thinking about them
question number four to ask yourself and
this one is a little bit of an advanced
question but if you can get it right
it's going to go a long way this
question is what do I want from this
person in reality versus what do I want
from them psychologically and how
realistic is the thing that I want from
them psychologically so this one I will
just explain with examples because I
think that's the easiest way insecure
relationships there are absolutely
things that we want from people both
practically and psychologically so an
example might be if I'm in a committed
partnership with someone we might live
together we might pool our finances is
we might have certain roles that we
consistently play in each other's
practical day-to-day lives there's an
amount at which we see each other spend
time together and all of that is very
quantifiable and real then there are the
psychological expectations right so I
might assume in a secure relationship
that we're going to be reasonably honest
and emotionally open with each other so
I might rely on them for a certain
amount of co-regulation so I rely on
them to be a part of this ecosystem that
I have of people I go to to talk things
through in an emotionally intimate way
however in a limerent relationship what
you'll often find is that the
psychological expectations you're
placing on a person are incredibly High
to the point of being completely
unrealistic so in my more limerent days
here are some of the expectations that I
realized in retrospect I had on a
particular limerent object I want you to
make me always feel good about myself I
want to always feel cool through knowing
that I'm associated with you I want to
always feel desirable and good about
myself based on knowing that you are a
person who likes sleeping with me now
all of those needs are self-esteem needs
right they're not really about the
connection I have with the other person
they're about how I want to feel so a
lot of the time when we are feeling
limerent and someone is not acting in a
way that we want them to act in order to
keep fulfilling one of those
psychological needs we're likely to get
upset rather than having compassion for
this other person's Human Experience so
in a secure relationship I don't feel
like it's my partner's job to make me
feel good all the time that's not the
role that they play for me
psychologically their role is more one
of companionship and trust and emotional
intimacy which contains a ton of
different feelings within it right but
in limerent relationships if we're
getting our core self-esteem or
psychological needs met through our idea
of a relationship that we're having with
this person we're going to get really
dysregulated anytime they're not acting
in a way that preserves the idea we have
about ourselves through their eyes so
this actually very neatly leads us to
point number five which is something you
want to be paying very close attention
to to determine whether you're
experiencing limerence or true love is
the following question how different do
you feel about yourself when you think
about being loved by this person versus
not being loved by this person so if you
are in a secure relationship well it is
of course disappointing to lose out on a
potential romantic connection that you
thought was going to be compatible and
it might feel like a bit of a blow to
the ego generally it's not going to
shake the core of your self-perception
to have a relationship not work out
especially in the early stages however
when we're experiencing limerence what
we're generally doing is projecting most
of our self-esteem needs onto a Fantasy
relationship and telling ourselves I am
okay as long as this person reciprocates
my affection so when they don't
reciprocate our affection it feels like
all of our self-esteem is going out the
window versus when they do reciprocate
our affection it might feel like we are
on cloud nine and absolutely winning at
everything so the way we think about
ourselves when we are limerent tends to
fluctuate greatly with the attention
that our limerent object is giving or
not giving us versus once again in a
secure relationship well our mood might
fluctuate to a certain extent based on
what's happening in a romantic
relationship our self-concept is not
likely to fluctuate very much if at all
in relation to whether this person does
or doesn't like us because if we're
truly trying to find a partner who we're
compatible with them liking us and
wanting to be with us is one of the main
things we're looking for so if that's
not present in someone we're dating it's
just going to be a sign that that's not
the right person for us so maybe we
re-categorize them as a friend and move
on to try to find someone we're more
compatible with again that I'm okay
you're okay worldview is present
throughout the entire process so if
you're not compatible with someone as a
secure person it doesn't mean that you
are a bad person it doesn't mean you're
unattractive or unlovable it just means
The Vibes weren't all that complementary
it's just a very natural outcome of
dating around you meet a lot of people
who aren't a great fit for you and you
just learn a lot about yourself in the
process what your own needs and wants
are as well as what you like to give to
a relationship and you continue
searching for a person who's more
compatible with you versus in a limerent
relationship where you might be
unconsciously Outsourcing a ton of your
self-esteem needs onto your fantasy life
that revolves around this other person
because you're telling yourself if I can
get them to love me then I am worthy and
if they don't then I am unworthy there's
going to be huge fluctuations in the way
that you think about yourself often day
to day depending on how that person is
responding to you and that's going to be
a pretty big indication that what you're
dealing with is limerence rather than a
genuine reality-based connection now in
the future we're going to talk about how
to start breaking down these patterns of
limerent thought so how to make sure
that when you're entering a relationship
you're staying relatively grounded and
aware of whether you are and aren't
compatible and using that real
information to make important decisions
about how to proceed in the getting to
know someone process but for now I'm
going to leave it at those five
questions I encourage you to ask
yourself if you're trying to figure out
is this limerence or is it true love as
always let me know in the comments what
comes up for you as you do pose those
questions to yourself as well as any
thoughts feelings experiences you feel
called to share as always I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]