hey everybody Dr eatonson here from the
heel NPD YouTube channel bringing you
four little known facts about NPD
according to the latest edition of the
DSM fact number one lack of empathy is
not a requirement to be diagnosed with
NPD fact number two NPD is correlated
with suicide and depression fact number
three up to 50 of people diagnosed with
NPD identify as female and fact number
four according to the DSM many
individuals with NPD have low
self-esteem or fragile self-esteem and
here's a bonus fact NPD is a very
treatable disorder as long as the person
is willing to put in the work you can
check out the heel NPD YouTube channel
for more information until next time
take good careHi everyone, welcome to Weekly Insights.
There's a growing claim out there,
sometimes in academic writing, but more
often in online commentary, that
narcissistic personality disorder, or
NPD, is almost entirely genetic. Some
recent authors have even suggested
heritability rates as high as 80%.
So today I want to take a closer look at
that claim. Not to deny that genes play
some role in personality development,
but to question what it really means
when we say that a condition is genetic
and whether that claim holds up when
applied to
NPD. So let's begin with the most
generous reading of this view.
Narcissistic traits, like many
personality traits, do show some degree
of heritability. Twin studies have found
moderate genetic contributions to traits
like antagonism, impulsivity,
extraversion, and low agreeableness. And
these are traits that are sometimes
considered proximal to narcissistic
functioning. For example, a 2014 twin
study in plus one found that grandiosity
had a heritability of about 23% and
entitlement of about 35%.
To be fair, this figure is not
insignificant, but it falls well short
of genetic
determinism. There are also findings
from research using the five factor
model showing that narcissism correlates
with high extraversion and low
agreeableness, both of which show
moderate
heritability. But inheriting a tendency
toward boldness or antagonism isn't the
same thing as developing a personality
disorder. The presence of a trait is not
equivalent to the presence of a
syndrome. Unfortunately, this modest
heritability is sometimes extrapolated
into sweeping deterministic claims. And
more troublingly, these claims are often
made without a full understanding of
what NPD actually is, its essential
features, its complexity, and how it's
accurately assessed.
One of the most common arguments used to
support the idea of a primarily genetic
origin is brain imaging. Some studies
have found differences in brain
structure and function in individuals
with narcissistic traits, especially in
the prefrontal cortex and the anterior
insula. These regions are involved in
empathy, emotion regulation, and
self-awareness. For example, a 2013
study published in the Journal of
Psychiatric Research found reduced gray
matter volume in the left anterior
insula in individuals diagnosed with
NPD. But here we need to pause. The
existence of neural differences doesn't
tell us why those differences exist,
only that they do. There's an assumption
that if something appears on a brain
scan, it must be genetically caused. But
that's not actually how neurodevelopment
works.
The brain is exquisitely plastic. It's
shaped as much by experience as by
inherited structure. Neurons that fire
together wire together is a central
principle of experience dependent
plasticity. When emotional expression is
met with rejection or indifference or
when vulnerability is punished rather
than comforted, the child adapts and
those adaptations become neural
patterns. Defensive postures like
emotional constriction, vigilance, or
performative self-presentation shape the
developing brain and over time they will
show up in imaging studies. But that
doesn't mean that they started there.
In fact, a 2023 study found that
emotional neglect was correlated with
structural changes in brain regions that
are critical for social cognition and
empathy, notably the anterior insula,
the very same region implicated in
empathy deficits among individuals with
narcissistic features. These neural
alterations highlight the impact of
early emotional neglect on the
development of brain areas that are
essential for emotional awareness and
interpersonal understanding. And we have
growing empirical support for the
importance of early relational
experience in the development of
narcissistic traits. For example, atwe
and vnoli in 2006 found that both
emotional coldness and excessive
parental overvaluation predicted higher
narcissism scores in adulthood. Horton
and colleagues also in 2006 similarly
found that low parental warmth combined
with unrealistic or inflated praise was
associated with later narcissistic
traits. And a 2015 longitudinal study
demonstrated that parental
overvaluation, that is treating children
as inherently more special or entitled
than others, significantly predicted the
emergence of narcissistic traits over
time.
These findings are consistent with the
long-standing clinical understanding
that narcissistic pathology develops
through a complex interplay of
constitutional vulnerability and early
relational failures, not through genetic
transmission alone.
So, while it's true that individuals
with narcissistic traits show
differences in brain regions that are
associated with things like empathy or
self-awareness, to suggest that these
are genetic causes rather than
developmental consequences is a leap
that simply isn't justified by the
evidence. The deeper problem with these
genetic arguments is that they often
begin from a distorted view of what NPD
actually is.
Too often NPD is reduced to traits like
arrogance, entitlement, or lack of
empathy. And if that's all there was,
then sure, it might be easier to argue
for a neurobiological substrate. But
that's not what NPD is. For example,
numerous studies of narcissism are still
using the narcissistic personality
inventory or NPI as their main indicator
of pathological narcissism. The problem
here, as I've discussed in previous
videos, is that the NPI doesn't measure
pathological narcissism. It largely
measures disagreeable but adaptive
traits like extraversion, confidence,
and socially aggressive behaviors. And
these aren't NPD. They fall well short
of capturing anything specific to NPD.
Even a cursory search through recent
articles brought up a study from 2021
that correlated high NPI scores with
differences in preffrontal brain
structure, drawing erroneous conclusions
in the process. NPD is a deeply
conflicted internally unstable
condition. The diagnosis itself has long
been controversial. In fact, it was
nearly eliminated from the DSM5 in 2013
due to poor empirical grounding, low
interrator reliability, and limited
clinical utility. It remains one of the
least reliably diagnosed personality
disorders in the manual.
The DSM criteria prioritize overt traits
like grandiosity, fantasies of success,
and need for admiration while largely
ignoring the vulnerable core that has
been extensively documented in the
clinical literature. NPD isn't arrogance
or confidence or even low empathy. And
studies that isolate those traits and
then call them quote narcissism are
incomplete at best and misleading at
worst. The vulnerable core of NPD is
vital to understanding and accurately
identifying the disorder. It includes
chronic shame, unstable self-esteem,
social withdrawal, depression, and even
suicidality. People with narcissistic
personality pathology often feel like
impostors in their own lives. And this
is where the genetic narrative begins to
fall apart. Because are we really to
believe that a specific genetic
combination reliably produces both
crushing self-doubt and highly complex
compensatory defenses? Both low
selfworth and the grandiose systems that
prop it up. That's not how genetics
works. It's certainly not how
personality development works. For
decades, psychonamic clinicians have
described early environments commonly
seen in people with narcissistic
pathology. Homes where emotional
attunement was inconsistent or absent,
where achievement was rewarded more than
presence, where normal needs for care,
validation, and vulnerability were
treated as shameful or weak. Hines Kohut
called this the failure of empathic
mirroring. Otto Kernberg wrote of
parental figures who were themselves
fragile, punitive, or emotionally
unavailable. And James Mastersonson
described the conflict between the real
self and the false self in the
narcissistic
personality. In all of these
formulations, narcissism is not a trait.
Rather, it's a defensive solution, a way
of maintaining psychic cohesion in the
absence of adequate relational support.
And in my own clinical experience with
over a decade of specializing in
pathological narcissism and NPD, I have
never encountered someone with a full
syndrome presentation of NPD who did not
describe significant emotional neglect
or relational trauma. Not one. That's
anecdotal, of course, but it is
anecdotally consistent with nearly every
clinical theory of narcissistic
development that we have.
So let's compare this now with something
like Alzheimer's disease. We don't have
all the pieces, but we do understand
Alzheimer's to be a biologically based
condition. We've identified genetic
markers like the APOE4 gene that
reliably increase risk. We can image the
brain. We know the course of progression
and we can reliably and verifiably
diagnose it. And yet, even with all
that, our best estimate for heritability
is only about 40 to 50%. The rest comes
from environment, things like lifestyle,
vascular health, inflammation, and diet.
So, how do we get from 40% heritability
in a medically defined biomarker
supported condition like Alzheimer's to
80% heritability in a poorly defined
non-biological socially shaped syndrome
like NPD? Where are the genes? Where's
the imaging evidence? Where's the
consensus? It's simply not there. It
sounds authoritative to say that
something is genetic, but it's often
used to shut down inquiry rather than
promote it. It flattens complexity. It
lets us ignore context. It lets us say,
"Well, this is just how they are. They
were born that way." But that's not what
the science says. Genes matter.
Temperament matters. But narcissistic
personality pathology emerges from an
ongoing recursive relational process.
It's shaped by how we're met in our
vulnerability when we're young, how
we're seen or not seen, how we're loved
or not loved. To suggest that NPD is
almost entirely genetic is to ignore the
heart of the disorder and to invalidate
the very real suffering that people with
NPD have experienced, the tragic
neglect, abuse, and trauma that
contributes substantially to its
development. I won't claim to understand
why people feel so motivated to adopt
the stance that NPD is almost entirely
genetic. Maybe it's just a simple answer
to a complex question and people find
that easier to
swallow. But the real answer is that we
simply don't know. We can't identify
genetic markers, brain pathways, or
neurochemical imbalances for most forms
of mental illness. We simply don't
understand the brain as well as we'd
like. And I think lots of people are
frightened by that ambiguity. But when
we're faced with not knowing, we
shouldn't respond by making up
comforting answers.
Someday we might develop a coherent
brainbased model for mental illnesses
like NPD, but that day remains somewhere
in the
future. Okay, so that's it for today. As
always, leave questions or comments
below. And if you like this video and
you'd like to receive more like it on a
weekly basis, consider becoming a paid
member of the channel. Your support
helps me to make more content more
often. Until next time, take good care.
[Music]hi everyone Dr eatonson here with a
short little video to tell you about my
book unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding The Narcissist in your
life the book is relatively short and
it's written in plain English it's
written for people who want to
understand the psychology of a
narcissistic friend colleague or loved
one perhaps most importantly the book is
written from a compassionate and
non-stigmatizing perspective based on
the belief that we're all human beings
it's available on Amazon and also at
Major book retailers I'll put a link in
the description and if you'd like to
learn more about narcissism from a
compassionate and non-sigmatizing
perspective be sure to check out my
YouTube channel heal NPD thanks for
watching and take good carehi everyone my name is Dr Mark enson
welcome to heal NPD to assess
personality we need to ask two questions
first what is the personality style are
they depressive avoidant paranoid
narcissistic Etc the second question is
about severity what is the person's
overall level of distress and
dysfunction in this video we'll take a
closer look at the narcissistic
personality style in its most severe
form called psychotic personality
organization
so let's get
[Music]
started personality is best understood
as a complex set of adaptations we
develop ways of getting our
psychological needs met and ways of
protecting ourselves from harm many of
these adaptations are made in early
childhood and they're based on the
intersection between genetics and
experience we end up with one or more
dominant personality Styles these are
characteristic ways of thinking feeling
perceiving and behaving that are defined
by core conflicts and Central beliefs
that each of us has about ourselves and
about other people the narcissistic
personality style involves adaptations
around the issue of self-esteem to
defend against self-esteem collapse
defenses are utilized that seek
self-esteem inflation these defensive
adaptations protect the self and attempt
to compensate for internal self-esteem
resources that are otherwise lacking the
effectiveness of these defenses mostly
depends on the level of dysfunction in
the personality individuals on the
healthier end of the narcissistic
Spectrum tend to utilize flexible
defenses that help them resolve
conflicts while increasing social
support individuals at the more severe
end tend to use defenses that are
disruptive to their daily lives damaging
to their relationships and even ones
that distort reality all of this is tied
to a person's developmental maturity and
the severity of the disturbances that
are caused by the central conflict
around self-esteem as someone moves up
the spectrum of Developmental maturity
their use of problematic defenses goes
down and this is true for any
personality style not just narcissistic
the more integrated stable and defined
our self-image the less we need to rely
on reality distorting boundary blurring
or truth obfuscating defenses
this developmental spectrum is defined
by several distinct levels of
Personality organization Each of which
contain a developmental challenge that
must be successfully negotiated to move
to the next level the first challenge is
learning to tolerate reality this level
is called psychotic organization
psychotically organized individuals have
difficulty maintaining a consistent
perception of what's real images of the
self and of other people are subject to
extreme distortions and the personality
is chronically overwrought by its own
preoccupations and anxieties typically
concerning loss of self the next
challenge involves recognizing that the
self is separate from other people this
level is called borderline organization
and it's typically marked by profound
confusion about boundaries between the
self and others borderline psychologies
also struggle with internal consistency
utilizing a defense called splitting
which collapses ambiguity and
ambivalence into simplified
polarizations that are either all good
or all bad these are also sometimes
called part objects as with psychotic
organizations borderline organizations
are dominated by anxiety about loss of
self and the clinical term for this is
paranoid
anxiety the main developmental task in
borderline organizations is called
individuation it's how we emerge as a
separate self with a stable integrated
identity next the personality moves from
split-off part object relationships to
integrated whole object relationships
and this level is called neurotic
organization here a person's identity is
integrated and individuated they also
have mostly stable integrated images of
other people at this level defenses
focus on defending loved ones from
fantasized harm caused by the
individual's angry feelings or
destructive impulses the dominant
anxiety stops being about loss of self
and it begins to concern object loss the
clinical term for anxiety about object
loss is neurotic anxiety neurotic
organizations are dominated by guilt and
neurotic defenses tend to focus on
things like repression or reaction
formation that attempt to conceal
destructive impulses and Fantasies from
the self and from other people the main
developmental challenge at the neurotic
level is learning to tolerate loss and
also to create a realistic perspective
on the self's destru
capacities the person must learn that
angry or destructive fantasies and
impulses don't necessarily need to be
hidden from awareness they're Facts of
Life and they can be channeled in
productive directions that actually
enhance relationships rather than
destroy them the final level of
development is called healthy
organization at this level the focus is
on authenticity relationships and
self-actualization healthy organization
is characterized by flexibility and
affiliation the person relies on healthy
defenses that don't distort reality
don't blur boundaries and that aren't
overly concerned with hiding or
concealing authentic needs and feelings
instead healthy defenses focus on
strengthening social bonds and
channeling conflicts in productive
directions these include things like
humor alism and sublimation which is
when feelings like anger or frustration
are channeled into work art or Fitness
healthy individuals still have Central
wounds and core conflicts but they've
developed internal resources to manage
those conflicts in ways that are less
costly and provide benefit both to
themselves and to other people so in
this video we'll focus on the psychotic
level of organization as it presents in
narcissistic personality Styles remember
these are styles that are dominated by
vulnerabilities and self-esteem and The
Psychotic organization represents the
lowest level of personality development
and it also involves the most severe
symptoms thanks to popular media people
confuse the word psychotic with images
of stalkers serial killers or killer
clowns with red balloons but the term
simply means that someone has lost
contact with reality recognizing what is
real and what is not is a foundational
mental ability but it's not something
with which we're born very young
children don't have enough experience to
reliably distinguish fact from fiction
roughly speaking what are the odds that
a monster is hiding under your bed for
most adults that calculation occurs
almost
instantaneously but 5-year-olds on the
other hand might spend hours lying awake
at night trying to figure it out but
experience is only part of the story we
also need to grow and develop mental
functions that reliably track and
negotiate what's real and these are
sometimes called ego functions most of
us have adequate ego functions to
distinguish fact from fiction by the
time we're adults we don't fundamentally
alter our perception of the world when
we encounter stress for example getting
rejected from a job application can be
difficult to tolerate but we find ways
to accept the reality and move forward
that ability is due to our mature ego
functions someone without such
capacities might instead construct a
delusion to protect themselves from the
Intolerable reality of rejection perhaps
that the job rejected them because of a
government conspiracy to deprive them of
gainful employment the key to
understanding psychotic organization is
that the mind is not mature enough in
its ego functions to hold reality as a
constant instead it bends reality to
neutralize threats often altering
self-image and object relations in
dramatic ways in the process now I want
to be clear that I'm not necessarily
discussing psychotic disorders like
schizophrenia I'm discussing a level of
personality devel velopment that is
characterized by periodic or chronic
lapses in reality testing typically in
response to emotional distress or
perceived threat one article from 2014
puts it like this psychotic organization
is characterized by failure of defensive
regulation to contain the individual's
reaction to stressors leading to a
pronounced break with objective reality
end quote Otto kernberg who is generally
credited with introducing these Concepts
ceps writes that quote reality testing
is severely impaired in psychotic
organization end quot we all distort
reality in response to psychological
threats when we're young children often
have wildly unrealistic ideas about
themselves and about the world around
them they tend to treat thoughts and
actions as equivalent they may believe
that something happened simply because
they imagined it they may cope with
difficult Feelings by altering their
perception of events
when I was about 3 years old my parents
had just separated and I began to see
Phantom creatures floating across my
room at night they'd come out of one
wall move across the floor and then
disappear into the opposite wall I'd see
circus animals dragons unicorns and
other figures I called them shadows and
they were terrifying because I could see
them with my waking eyes these
hallucinations lasted for a period and
then one night they simply went away and
I never saw them again people tend to
shrug when I tell them about this kids
have vivid imaginations they have
imaginary friends they see things that
aren't there or sometimes selectively
don't see things that are there reality
is fluid when we're young it's a period
of development where our relationship
with reality is still being
negotiated given good enough experience
most people grow Beyond this psychotic
phase of development its Legacy remains
in the form of Whimsy art and creativity
however significant trauma in early life
can be disruptive to normal development
if things are too frightening or too
overwhelming if early experience is a
chaos of unreliable caregivers emotional
double binds or Unthinkable situations
that the Mind simply can't process then
the necessary ego functions may not
develop in a reliable way leaving the
adult personality vulnerable to
psychotic Distortion under stress people
with psychotic organizations don't
necessarily appear quote crazy or even
severely mentally ill their issues may
only become apparent when they encounter
a psychological threat in the case of
narcissistic personalities these issues
would most likely manifest when the
person experiences a situation that
threatens their self-esteem psychologist
and author Nancy McWilliams provides an
effective portrait of psychotic
organization she writes there are many
people walking around whose basic
psychotic level internal confusion does
not surface conspicuously unless they're
under considerable stress it's useful to
conceive of some people who may never
become diagnosa psychotic as
nevertheless living in a symbiotic
psychotic internal World they function
sometimes quite effectively but they
strike one as confused and deeply
terrified and their thinking feels
disorganized or paranoid end quote for
someone with a narcissistic personality
style who's organized at at The
Psychotic level insecurities about
self-worth May manifest in reality
distorting ways they may believe
themselves to be literally perfect
Invincible or to have special powers or
they may engage in disturbing
devaluations of self that are also not
reality based for example in some
individuals body dysmorphia can
represent a psychotic Distortion of
self-image psychotic distortions can
also affect the perception of social
relationships individuals may distort
interaction actions and events in the
service of perceiving themselves to be
perfect powerful rich or beautiful when
confronted with facts that disprove
their claims such individuals will
typically Retreat further into delusion
or engage in paranoid projections and
devaluations MC Williams notes that
psychotic process in such individuals is
quote preverbal and prerational and that
means that it belongs to a very early
stage of mental development she writes
that psychotically organized individuals
use reality distorting defenses to
protect against quote a level of
nameless dread so overwhelming that
psychotic distortions are less
terrifying than the dread against which
they defend this is another key in
understanding psychotic organization
these individuals are beset by profound
Terror that they can't verbalize or even
symbolize and by that I mean that the
actual anxieties can't properly be
represented in the individual's mind the
ego functions needed to do that that
simply haven't been developed the self
is too fragile too small and too
unintegrated to withstand troubling
realities instead distressing experience
must be expelled or disguised by
psychotic defenses this Terror or dread
is almost always existential and it's
the sort of fear that healthier
individuals tend to repress healthier
individuals also develop a self
structure that's resilient enough to
withstand its own fears of annihilation
but in psychotic organization the self
structure is not galvanized it doubts
its own existence MC Williams writes
they may not be fully sure that they
exist they are deeply confused about who
they are and they usually struggle with
basic issues of self- defin they cannot
depend on a sense of continuity of
identity in themselves and do not
experience others as having continuity
of self either when asked to describe
themselves or important people in their
lives they tend to be vague tangential
concrete or observably distorting the
critical thing for therapists to
appreciate is that close to the surface
in people with psychotic level
psychologies one finds both mortal fear
and dire confusion end quote as stated
previously psychotic organizations
involve paranoid anxiety which is
anxiety about loss of self they're
terrified of being obliterated
dissolving into non-being experiencing
traumatic loss of control over their
bodies or being taken over
psychologically this anxiety can easily
overwhelm the individual's rudimentary
ego functions leading to The Psychotic
distortions that characterize this level
of
organization The Psychotic self
structure is not developed enough to
hold strong feelings it must externalize
them or transform them into concrete
metaphors it can't take responsibility
for its own feelings it must view them
as coming from outside the self it can't
tolerate stressful or confusing
emotional contradictions it must split
the self to preserve a basic sense of
goodness or it must collapse ambiguity
into reality distorting one-dimensional
perceptions the weak or compromised ego
functions that characterize psychotic
organization also cause Reliance on
reality distorting defense mechanisms
The Psychotic defense mechanisms rating
scale or pdmrs is one way that
psychologists assess some of these
defenses now it's important to
understand that anyone could regress to
the use of one or two of these defenses
in the face of a severe crisis it's only
when a person tends to use these sorts
of defenses habitually that we begin to
suspect psychotic
organization here are some of the
defenses described by The
pdmrs Psychotic denial this is when a
person engages in wholesale denial of
any reality that is too frightening or
too stressful to tolerate an example of
this might be someone diagnosed with a
serious illness who fails to take even
minimal steps to address the diagnosis
and obtain treatment instead behaving
and feeling as though the diagnosis
never happened Distortion this is when a
person grossly Alters or reshapes
internal or external reality for example
I once got into a minor verbal conflict
with a man at a dog park he had parked
very close to my car and as a result I
wasn't able to open my door after
getting out the passenger sign I asked
him to please move his car which caused
him to become visibly agitated now I
wasn't doing anything threatening but
clearly he felt threatened by the mere
fact of my frustration out of the blue
he said you know what happens if you hit
me right I was taken aback because I
hadn't threatened to hit him I just
wanted him to move his car but the look
in his eye made me feel like I'd somehow
been abusing him for years even though
we'd never met then he pointed to the
dog sitting in his car and he spat he'll
rip your throat
out now this exchange was deeply
disturbing to me the man's reaction was
not reality based nothing about what was
happening would suggest to a reasonable
person that they were in any sort of
danger or that it would be appropriate
to say that their dog was going to rip
my throat out I could only assume that
in his mind I somehow represented a
grave threat to his physical safety I
became a concrete represent ation of his
internal fear and apprehension even
though I hadn't done anything to
threaten him our minor interpersonal
conflict set in motion a Cascade of
psychotic anxieties that caused him to
significantly distort
situation
concretization this is when a person
transforms a mental representation into
a concrete object situation or action
the concrete form is symbolically
related to a psychological wish or fear
many horror movies provide excellent
examples of concretized fears or
experiences that take physical form to
torment the main character for example
in the movie The babadook a mother
haunted by unprocessed grief and anger
is tormented by a physical manifestation
of her feelings which literally
possesses her and causes her to endanger
her
family psychotic fragmentation this is
when self-image object images and the
links between them become
fragmented such fragmentation produces a
disorganized and Confused narrative it
involves total splitting between
multiple self- States fracturing the
person into countless pieces that can't
be easily linked together someone
utilizing this defense may appear to
ramble incoherently to vacillate between
sudden and frighteningly intense
feelings and perceptions or to construct
narratives that seem to contain numerous
conflicting organizing
themes other defenses that are sometimes
considered psychotic include omnipotent
control this is an early defense
mechanism where the individual believes
they have absolute power over their
environment and other people use of this
defense in adulthood reflects a
regression to an infantile state of
primary narcissism where the child
believes they're the center of the
universe and the difference between the
real world and the self is obliterated
primitive idealization and
devaluation this is another early
defense mechanism that reflects the
young child's need to believe that
caregivers are all powerful and capable
of protecting them from all the dangers
of Life normal idealization is an
essential component of mature love and
represents an adult remnant of the
extreme primitive idealizations that
occur in childhood however when reality
defying wholesale idealizations continue
to occur in adulthood it reflects the
mind's inability to negotiate the
disappointing limitations of the self
and other people or the person's need to
believe that a perfect all powerful
figure in their life can protect them
from the paranoid anxieties that
threaten to overwhelm The Fragile self
primitive devaluation is the other side
of the coin the fantasized Perfection of
the idealized self or idealized object
will eventually collapse into an equally
distorted
devaluation primitive forms of
projection and
introjection these represent early
defense mechanisms that intensely blur
the boundaries between the self and
other people they come from a very early
period in psychological development
before we've discerned Which experiences
are coming from inside the self and
which are coming from the external World
these defenses are powerful but also
costly because they disrupt
relationships most of us only use them
under extreme
circumstances we tend to project when
something coming from inside the self is
too threatening and we introject when
something is so emotionally disruptive
that it overwhelms our ego boundaries
the extent of reality Distortion is what
distinguishes primitive projection from
non psychotic forms of projection for
example individuals who exhibit extreme
xenophobia racism or paranoid obsessions
about immigrants or quote others who
they believe are attacking them and
against whom they feel they must defend
are sometimes experiencing a psychotic
form of projection in which the others
typically possess qualities that the
individuals themselves are attempting to
disown primitive introjection is
essentially the reverse of projection it
involves perceiving something that is
outside the self as coming from inside
the self individuals with psychotic
organizations have extremely porous
sometimes basically non-existent
boundaries they can be profoundly
confused about what is inside the self
and what is not what boundaries they do
have can be easily overwhelmed in the
face of threatening or emotionally
disruptive experience experiences I once
worked with a patient who experienced
any confrontation as a dire threat when
I would make even basic interpretations
or challenges in treatment their face
would contort into a Grimace their body
posture would shift into a defensive
hunch and they would glare as though
suddenly filled with decades worth of
resentment in these moments the patient
was injecting the aggression that they
perceived to be coming from me healthier
individuals might feel a bit confronted
by a difficult interpretation and
treatment they might even imagine that I
was mad at them but they would also have
the ego functions to sort out what was
mine and what was theirs but this
patient was psychotically organized and
unable to perceive those distinctions my
perceived anger bypassed their ego
boundaries entirely and became their
anger they were in a way fused with it
and they embodied it in real time
another patient had a controlling parent
who routinely obliterated their
boundaries when they were young as an
adult they could sometimes quote hear
that parent voice speaking in the
background of their thoughts it felt
like the controlling domineering parent
was somehow inside of them the voice
speaking on its own but also in a way
that felt fused with their own thoughts
there are other defenses that could
probably be included here because they
sometimes take on a psychotic quality
but the focus of this channel is
pathological narcissism and NPD so I I
want to spend a few minutes discussing
that
specifically first we would
automatically assume that someone with a
narcissistic personality style organized
at The Psychotic level has NPD
personality disorders are generally
conceptualized as occurring exclusively
in the psychotic and borderline ranges
of functioning at these levels the ego
functions are not sufficiently developed
to contain and channel the person's core
conflicts instead the individual is
chronically overwhelmed by them and
tends to express them via maladaptive
strategies and the use of problematic
defenses a psychotic individual with NPD
would rely on many of the defenses
discussed in this video their self-image
would be notably distorted whether in a
positive or negative Direction they
would be prone to periodic experiences
of psychotic fragmentation during which
they would appear to lose coherence in
their
self-concept they would be preoccupied
with paranoid anxiety about loss of self
or collapse of their self-image many of
these preoccupations would involve
reality distorting defenses they would
likely have obsessions about quote
others paranoid beliefs about immigrants
people of other races or criminals onto
whom they had projected many of their
own negative qualities they would also
likely be prone to reality bending
grandios that were obvious Fabrications
their grandiosity would have a detached
from reality quality they might call
themselves perfect they might believe
themselves to be a God on Earth the
second coming of Jesus or other deity or
a long awaited hero who will save the
Earth conversely a psychotic person with
NPD might believe themselves to be
hideously grotesque they might
experience obsessions or body dysmorphia
that lead them to engage in self harm or
self-mutilation multiple plastic
surgeries dangerous diets Etc psychotic
NPD can also present with severe illness
anxiety or other disord ERS that take on
a reality distorting quality psychotic
individuals regardless of Personality
style often have a history of attempts
to self-medicate using drugs and alcohol
now in some ways the appearance of
psychotically organized individuals is
similar across all personality Styles
and this is because of how early in
development these issues are thought to
originate essentially freezing parts of
the personality in a Proto or
undeveloped State psychotically
organized individuals are intolerant of
their own selfhood the Mind
unconsciously attacks its own abilities
to make meaning out of experience
there's an intense and primitive fear of
both being a self and also of dissolving
into non-being because the immature self
structure present in psychotically
organized individuals can cause such
abject confusion and fear it can
actually cause those around them to take
a caretaking role to be clear psychotic
individuals are typically at risk for
abuse from other people however
individuals in this range of functioning
can also be unpredictable impulsive or
even dangerous under the right
circumstances they may believe that
they're fighting for their very survival
in situations where most people would
only be mildly anxious recall the man
who threatened to have his dog tear my
throat out because I asked him to move
his car if you begin to suspect that a
person is psychotic then it's best to
avoid confrontations it's likely that
they won't be able to engage in rational
or productive discourse they will more
likely perceive your confrontation as a
threat confusing it with already
terrifying primitive anxieties that
can't be effectively managed the best
thing to do is to be supportive but
boundaried offer reassurances if the
person is frightened and seek help if
the person is a danger to themselves or
to someone else you might be wondering
if psychotic organizations can be healed
I think the answer is yes but it takes a
long time psychotic organizations
represent profound developmental arrests
the person simply hasn't had the right
experiences over long enough periods of
time to help them grow and develop the
necessary ego functions to cope the good
news is that our minds want to develop
to use the language of Carl Rogers
there's an actualizing tendency in all
living things with time and Care a
person can develop the abilities they
lack progressing to the next
developmental level requ requires ego
functions that are capable of handling
distress without warping reality or
obliterating the distinction between
what's inside and what's outside the
South all of this is possible and there
are documented cases of people who have
done this work and who've come out the
other side so if you recognize these
qualities in yourself or a loved one
don't despair the next video in this
series will discuss borderline
organization which represents the next
step on the developmental Continuum
toward healthy psychology
as always leave questions or comments
and until next time take good care
[Music]hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eatonson
welcome to heal NPD the topic of
narcissistic abuse tends to be highly
charged and people tend to have
extremely strong feelings about it but I
also think that's why it deserves some
time and attention as a term
narcissistic abuse is not well defined
it's easily co-opted to fuel heavily
stigmatized representations of
pathological narcissism and NPD it's
used to describe anything from mild
bullying and criticism to domestic abuse
stalking and all points in between and
it's precisely because no one has a
solid definition of this term that it's
so dangerous
[Music]
foreign
[Music]
first it's important to know that this
is not a term with an established
definition in the clinical literature
for the time being narcissistic abuse is
mostly a lay term and it varies in
meaning depending on the user and the
Forum in which it's discussed but most
forums that I found discussing this term
conceptualize it to be a form of abuse
that involves several essential features
these include love bombing gaslighting
ignoring boundaries criticizing or
devaluing and other forms of
interpersonal manipulation or bullying
so going through this list I don't see
anything specific to pathological
narcissism or NPD love bombing or
idealizing others for instance is a
feature of several personality disorders
not just NPD idealizing devaluing and
splitting are all Hallmarks of something
called borderline personality
organization which is different than
borderline personality disorder
borderline personality organization is a
range of psychological functioning that
involves moderate to severe psychopath
apology all personality disorders reside
within this range of functioning and
therefore many of them deploy similar
defense mechanisms
goes for rewriting interpersonal history
and events or otherwise minimizing the
consequences of one's own actions this
is known by the popular term gaslighting
individuals with BPD HPD NPD and
anti-social personality disorder will
often minimize the negative effects of
their actions on others or claim that
the person is simply misremembering what
actually happened like idealizing
devaluing and splitting this rewriting
of history is another Hallmark of
borderline personality organization what
about ignoring boundaries again this is
something that's common to most
personality disorders individuals with
personality disorders tend to have
difficulty respecting the boundaries of
other people due to impulsivity and also
due to deficits in their ability to
understand that other people have
internal experiences that are different
from their own internal experiences it's
common for individuals with BPD HPD NPD
and anti-social personality disorder to
project their own thoughts and feelings
onto other people and then to hold them
accountable for quote making the person
feel a certain way one of the main goals
of most therapies that address
personality disorders is to help the
person understand that just because they
feel a certain way doesn't mean that
other people meant to make them feel
that way
reinforcing boundaries is a major
component of the work in the treatment
of almost every Personality Disorder so
we can't properly say that it's Unique
to narcissism what about manipulation
again it's common for people with
personality disorders to struggle with
interpersonal Effectiveness and
communication emotional coercion
interpersonal manipulation and
pressuring other people to do or say
what the person wants Etc are all
Hallmarks of numerous personality
disorders and this is partly due to
impairments in recognizing boundaries
which we just discussed and partly due
to the pressure of the individual's
emotional needs and insecurities they
just have a difficult time respecting
the feelings and wishes of other people
you know going down the list most
frequently cited features of
narcissistic abuse actually involve
mechanisms and interpersonal behaviors
that are commonly seen in personality
disorders and other forms of moderate to
severe mental illness that includes some
mood and anxiety disorders bipolar
disorder and also substance abuse
disorders so what about narcissistic
abuse is actually unique to narcissism
why not simply call it abuse and be done
with it why unnecessarily stigmatize
this population that's already at risk
for things like suicide depression and
self-harm
well thinking about it there is one form
of abuse that I think actually is unique
to pathological narcissism and NPD and
like many other kinds of abuse this one
is transmitted from generation to
generation and it's actually the reason
why most individuals struggle with NPD
in the first place this form of abuse
involves using other people to meet
one's own self-esteem needs it's
essentially what parents and caregivers
do to children who grow up to struggle
with pathological narcissism it's a form
of emotional neglect paired with a form
of interpersonal manipulation that
pressures the child into ignoring their
own feelings in favor of quote living up
to the expectations of the caregiver
in a previous video entitled why
narcissists feel empty inside I outlined
this kind of abuse and the ways in which
it results in an impaired relationship
with genuine thoughts and feelings
narcissists are set up to become
flattering mirrors for their caregivers
when they grow into adulthood this
disconnect from authenticity leaves the
narcissistic individual always hungry
for approval and because they can't see
themselves as a self as an individual
Center of internal experience that's
valid and important in its own right
they can't see other people as selves
either
everyone becomes an object everyone is
rated in terms of how well they're
performing according to whatever
standards of performance or set up when
the narcissist was young NPD is a
disorder that robs everyone of their
Humanity The Narcissist was robbed of
their Humanity when they were young and
they grow into an adult who's feverishly
trying to fill a void where a connection
to authenticity should be instead
there's something called a false self
which is an objectified experience of
selfhood on which the narcissist has
come to rely it's the inauthentic quote
self that the individual developed as a
child to meet the narcissistic needs of
their caregiver
the false self runs on approval it
collapses in the absence of continuous
infusions of admiration approval success
and affiliation with idealized others
The Narcissist must continually
reinforce the false self by pressuring
other people to approve of them or to
admire them this becomes another Link in
the chain of using others and exploiting
them to meet one's own self-esteem and
emotional needs the narcissist does to
other people what was done to them
this chain of dehumanization continues
unabated until someone finally enters
treatment and sets their mind to putting
a stop to it but doing that requires
knowing about it in the first place and
because the false self can be so
convincingly real to The Narcissist they
have no idea that they're stuck in a
never-ending quest for temporary
self-esteem
this way of using someone of negating or
ignoring their selfhood of seeing and
treating them as an object in order to
maintain the viability of a false self
I think could properly be said to be
unique to NPD and therefore to
constitute an actual definition of
narcissistic abuse but this is far from
the villainous or predatory image
conjured in most forums discussing this
topic for one it doesn't necessarily
involve conscious manipulation
rather it's simply a way of being and
relating that was learned in childhood
and that's perpetuated by Deep deficits
and impairments in the narcissist's self
unlike other definitions of narcissistic
abuse this one holds the humanity of all
involved by recognizing the hurt and
pain both for the narcissist and for the
people that they abuse in this way the
way out of this cycle of abuse is to
look inside it's to embrace
vulnerability emptiness loss and want
it's to work on admitting to yourself
that the visions of perfection and the
feelings of grandiosity are fantasies
and they can't ever be real
the false self is a Monument built to
Shield the individual from pain of abuse
that has already occurred and it must be
torn down this demolition work is best
accomplished within the safety of a
therapy relationship with a licensed
mental health provider
if you identify as someone with
pathological narcissism or NPD ending
the chain of abuse is up to you and it
starts by learning to recognize your own
Humanity only then will you be able to
see the humanity in others
work on finding a place inside of
yourself that's stable balanced and
authentic this is the foundation from
which you can begin to construct an
authentic experience of selfhood and an
image of self that's not reliant on the
approval of other people
as you grow into your sense of yourself
as an authentic vulnerable human being
you'll begin to get better at managing
the storms of emotion that often result
in mistreatment of yourself and of
others and as your image of yourself
becomes more stable and more grounded in
authentic feeling rather than
objectified standards like performance
your image of others will also become
more stable
they'll be less splitting less
idealizing and devaluing less
gaslighting and less boundary Crossing
okay so that's it for today as always
leave comments questions and ideas for
future episodes and please also give
this video a like or subscribe if you
found it helpful and until next time
take good care
[Music][Music]
hi everyone my name is dr mark eatonson
i'm a licensed psychologist specializing
in the treatment of pathological
narcissism and related issues and also
author of the book unmasking narcissism
a guide to understanding the narcissist
in your life
available on amazon and at major book
retailers the book's a hands-on guide to
understanding the psychology of
narcissism from an empathic and
compassionate perspective
so a number of listeners have commented
on how difficult it is to find a good
therapist to treat narcissistic issues
and some have also asked if therapy is
really necessary
so today i'd like to address both of
those issues
first i'll discuss the relative lack of
therapists who really understand
narcissism and i'll also make some
suggestions about where you might find
ones that do
i'll also discuss why i think therapy is
necessary for healing in my opinion it's
only possible to get just so far down
the path by yourself
pathological narcissism is created in
our early relationships and it's best
healed through the experience of a
positive corrective relationship with a
qualified therapist so let's start with
the shocking lack of qualified
therapists who treat this disorder there
are plenty of clinicians who specialize
in working with individuals who have
been hurt or abused by someone with npd
but it seems that only a handful of
therapists actually specialize in
working with narcissists themselves
of those an even smaller number actually
seem to understand the psychology of
narcissism
i'm sometimes asked to provide an expert
review of new books on the topic of
narcissism and i have yet to see a draft
that doesn't pick the very low hanging
fruit of characterizing narcissists as
quote evil
likewise most of the information online
is heavily slanted in the direction of
pathologizing and othering people with
this disorder
treating npd as a one-dimensional straw
man rather than a complex trauma-based
variant of human psychology i spend more
time than i'd like defending myself
against people who seem to believe that
the only permissible thing to say when
it comes to narcissism is
those people are terrible all of this is
to say that when it comes to narcissism
there's a fair bit of confusion and it
can be difficult to find a therapist
whose knowledge of npd can't be summed
up by a dsm checklist something they
heard from a colleague about a difficult
patient or an article they read on
psychologytoday.com
i vividly recall sitting in a case
consultation group a number of years ago
a colleague was presenting a case that
had them stumped
and i commented that the patient sounded
narcissistic
the colleague gave my comment a cursory
acknowledgement but didn't really seem
to take it seriously so i repeated my
observation i actually repeated it two
more times
finally they turned to me and they
exclaimed yes i get it they're
narcissistic but how does that help me
and it was then that i realized that my
colleague only understood narcissism as
an insult
something derogatory to say to someone
who's behaving selfishly meanwhile i was
thinking of it as a personality style
based on comprehensible relational
trauma that has clear implications for
the course of treatment
my colleague simply thought i was
calling their patient a name and sadly
this perspective is quite common among
mental health professionals
even the ones who purportedly specialize
in npd often come from a decidedly
surface level skills-based paradigm and
they don't really understand the
psychology of the people they're
treating
and in my opinion anyone who really
understands narcissism sees it as a
tragic disorder based in unfathomable
loss and betrayal of the child's most
basic needs for unconditional love and
positive regard
the author stephen johnson calls
narcissists used children and i have yet
to hear a more apt description of course
there are also plenty of internet
experts on narcissism and some of them
even have formal training in psychology
but most of them also opt for the
familiar stigmatizing approach in their
treatment of the topic it's much more
difficult and sadly rare
to find someone who can balance the
humanity of all involved and discuss the
complexities of pathological narcissism
as both a psychological phenomenon that
afflicts individuals and as a relational
phenomenon that afflicts groups or pairs
of people the nature of narcissistic
pathology is to collapse psychological
and emotional space to defend against
shame and vulnerability this defense is
called splitting
i'm good you're bad
it's both comforting and regressive to
view the world in shades of black and
white how ironic then that almost all of
the information out there about this
disorder engages in the same regressive
maneuver portraying complex relational
dynamics in oversimplified terms of doer
and done to
so what's a person to do
i know for a fact that there are many
people out there who struggle with
narcissism and who also want help i see
them in my practice
i get emails from them on a daily basis
i read their comments on my videos
there are large internet forums where
narcissists try to support each other on
the path to healing
all of this somehow goes unseen by both
the lay public
and the mental health establishment
where the common wisdom is that
narcissists don't want help they don't
seek help and they can't be helped
and to be fair
this portrayal is sometimes true but the
same could be said for almost any other
mental illness
there is always a subset of treatment
resistant patients who simply don't want
or can't accept help
there are always individuals who are too
defended who reject the well-meant
attempts by their loved ones to tell
them that they have a problem that
something is wrong
such thick-headedness is in no way
unique to narcissists and in my
experience there are many narcissists
out there who want help so what should
they do
where should they turn to find help that
isn't about making them swallow the
narrative that they're terrible people
and that the only quote cure is to
basically cease to exist
as you might be able to tell this topic
is incredibly frustrating to me
the material is there for anyone to read
very smart people have been writing
about this disorder for over a hundred
years
it wasn't until the 21st century that
the literature on narcissism took a
decidedly ugly turn in the direction of
vilification and stigmatization
heinz kohut created an entire branch of
psychological theory and technique based
around the idea that narcissists are
human beings who have sustained a
comprehensible and tragic wound an early
relational trauma that set them against
themselves and left them without the
basic psychological tools they need to
evaluate their experience in balanced
and realistic ways
more importantly his ideas are rooted in
the recognition that narcissism is about
deficits not the presence of some
malignant pathology
there's a legacy of mainstream
psychological theory dating back to the
mid-20th century that provides a
compassionate perspective on the
disorder while not losing sight of the
maladaptive aspects of npd that require
intervention the simple fact is that
clinicians used to know how to treat
narcissism
they used to understand it
then the dsm disorder got redefined in
the mid-1980s turning npd into the
caricature disorder we see today
ungrounded in actual human psychology
untethered to the subjective distress
and suffering that normally defines
mental illness
basically a two-dimensional list of
superficial traits that only describe a
narrow variant of npd and make it almost
impossible to conceptualize actually
treating the disorder
i could go on about this at length and i
have in some of my videos on the heel
npd youtube channel
more importantly i'm not the only one
making these criticisms
there are numerous articles in major
peer-reviewed journals in the last 15
years leveling these same complaints
much more articulately than i ever could
and i want to be clear that this isn't
just a frustrated rant
the point i'm trying to make is that
modern psychology has gone off the rails
to a certain extent when it comes to npd
to find someone who can treat this
disorder effectively you need to look
outside the usual channels
specifically i'm talking about finding
clinicians who know and utilize
psychoanalytic methods in their practice
i know psychoanalysis has gotten a bad
reputation but then again so has npd and
i assume you're beginning to see how
npd's reputation is
somewhat distorted
if you have preconceived ideas about
psychoanalytic theory and technique then
i ask you to suspend them for a few
minutes
because i assure you
that this reputation is similarly
distorted
psychoanalysis has come a very long way
since the days of sigmund freud
i teach a course on the topic to
doctoral students
at the beginning of the course i asked
them to share their ideas what have they
heard what were they taught
always i hear the same critiques
it's not scientific
it's basic assumptions about the mind
are unfalsifiable it's basically a cult
etc
and all of that was true
90 years ago
over the last 100 years psychoanalysis
has progressed and changed radically
from the early conjectures of freud
it's gone through a number of profound
iterations
and contemporary psychoanalytic theory
and technique is actually focused on
relationships as the bedrock of human
psychology
furthermore psychoanalytic therapies
continue to show amazing effectiveness
in the treatment of numerous issues but
they particularly shine when it comes to
complex personality-based
psychopathologies
and i'll link some studies in the
comments
the main perspective that i use in
thinking about narcissism is called
self-psychology it's one branch on the
tree of psychoanalytic theory
self-psychology was founded by heinz
kohut it's a radical re-examination of
the origins of selfhood
centering and contextualizing
the development of the self in our most
early relationships and following the
course of that self-development through
the lifespan it's grounded in compassion
and empathy
in fact self-psychology promotes the
experience of empathy as the most
important factor in the development of a
healthy self and it also promotes it as
the most important tool in the therapist
toolbox when treating narcissism
narcissists according to kohut
suffer from a chronic lack of empathy
you can't give what you haven't got
to heal npd there must be an intensive
and prolonged period in which the
patient is simply soaking up the
therapist's empathy
much like a very young child soaks up
their parents empathy
we discover ourselves
through empathic interactions with
others
so here's my advice to find treatment
most large cities have a psychoanalytic
society of some kind or other
look them up
send an email to their contact asking
for a referral even if you don't live
near a large city there's probably one
somewhere in your state
and many clinicians currently
are doing online therapy most clinicians
who are affiliated with such an
organization will have a psychoanalytic
perspective on narcissism which means
that they understand it as a form of
early relational trauma
even if they know little to nothing else
about it
this simple paradigm will make a world
of difference in their ability to
provide a consistent empathic response
in treatment
furthermore analytic therapists are
focused on the therapy relationship
they're less concerned about symptoms
and surface level presentation and
they're less concerned about skills
development and diagnosis they focus on
what is happening in the here and now
relationship which is exactly where the
focus needs to be to treat npd now this
isn't foolproof advice when you're
looking for someone ask them the
following question
how do you understand narcissistic
pathology
if their response mentions self-esteem
difficulties
shame
early wounds to the developing self an
interplay between grandiose and
vulnerable self-states or negotiating a
series of pushes and pulls in the
therapy relationship then you probably
found a keeper
alternatively if they focus on access to
cluster b or superficial things like
pride entitlement fantasies of
perfection or mention anything about
malignant narcissism machiavellianism
characterize narcissists as abusers or
say anything that sounds sort of
othering about the disorder then find
someone else now you should expect to
pay more for a psychoanalytic therapist
but you should also know that most
clinicians in private practice keep a
few low fee spots
don't be afraid to ask for that if you
genuinely can't afford full fee
you may also be able to negotiate less
frequent meetings
therapy will take longer if you meet
less often but something is better than
nothing
okay so i also want to address the
question of whether therapy is even
necessary
why can't you simply heal yourself
well to be perfectly honest a
significant proportion of healing does
take place on your own
but after more than a decade of focusing
on this disorder i'm convinced that
self-treatment alone is not sufficient
and here's why
the early emotional wounds that set
narcissistic pathology in motion
interfere with the development of
accurate self-perception
narcissism is a disorder characterized
by deficits deficits in the ability to
perceive self in others
deficits in the ability to manage and
maintain realistic self-esteem
deficits and coping and deficits in
interpersonal communication
donald winicott a famous psychoanalyst
and pediatrician who coined the term
false self
said it like this
he said
in individual emotional development the
precursor of the mirror
is the mother's face
the mother gazes at the baby in her arms
and the baby gazes at his mother's face
and finds himself therein
provided that the mother is really
looking at the unique small helpless
being and not projecting her own
expectations fears and plans for the
child
in that case
the child would not find himself in the
mother's face but rather the mother's
own projections
this child would remain without a mirror
and for the rest of his life would be
seeking this mirror in vain
so to sum it up what winnicott is saying
is that we discover ourself
through interactions with other people
the self is fundamentally
relational it only exists in relation to
others there's no such thing as a self
without other so if narcissism is the
disorder of the self
in which the development of the self has
been stunted
then the way to repair this deficit is
through a specific kind of interaction
with
and other
in this case it's the interaction with
the therapist
nowhere else will you find a person
trained to provide this kind of quote
re-parenting to give the consistent
positive empathically attuned mirroring
that the self needs to grow and develop
therapists are also trained
to provide a special set of boundaries
that protects both you and them from the
anger resentment and envy that reside
inside of a damaged self
allowing those feelings to emerge in
productive ways that facilitate and
deepen the relationship rather than
becoming a sort of toxic poison pill
that causes the relationship to end
you won't find this with a friend or a
partner or a boss or a mentor
you need a therapist
now you can and should research this
disorder on your own
you should try to find available
resources to support you on your journey
like this podcast
but
parts of you need to be discovered
and they can only be meaningfully
discovered by another person
another favorite winnicott quote on this
issue goes like this
it's a joy to be hidden
but disaster not to be found narcissism
is in some ways a disorder that's caused
by
quote not having been found
not having been seen or discovered
that which was never discovered in you
remains hidden even to yourself
and this is the deficit in the self that
makes you dependent on continual
feedback from others
only in therapy
will you be able to
slowly let go of that interpersonal
dependency for quote narcissistic supply
as you slowly gain more internal
resources and a clearer perspective on
yourself
and as you see yourself more clearly
you'll also see others more clearly
okay so i hope that helps
please be sure to leave questions and
comments and if you find this material
helpful i hope you will consider sharing
it or recommending it to others who you
feel might also find it helpful
and until next time take good care
[Music]
youthere are lots of people out there who
are wondering about this disorder they
wonder if they're a narcissist or maybe
they wonder if someone that they love is
a narcissist but they don't know where
to find accurate and non-stigmatizing
information about the disordernothing functions without boundaries
your home needs a door your body needs
skin your nation needs laws and your
relationships need rules mutually agreed
upon limits concerning what is
permissible and what is not we are each
entitled to set limits that feel good to
us and that reflect our personal
boundaries some simple examples might
include the right not to have our bodies
touched without our consent the right
not to be spoken to in an abusive or a
demeaning Manner and the right to manage
our own friendships and finances isThe false self was created in denial of
this original loss, this core
narcissistic wound, but it quickly
becomes its own prison. The person grows
up to seek validation and admiration,
which are experiences that reinforce
grandiosity and collude with the
individual's denial of the wounds that
lie underneath. However, on some level,
the person knows that the validation
isn't genuine. It's praise for the false
self and they're aware deep down of
profound deficits and dependencies
inside themselves. Feelings that they
may be terrified to let anyone else see.
The person feels compelled to keep it
hidden beneath a grandiose facade. With
the result being that the love they
receive in adulthood often feels just as
conditional as the quote love they
received as children. Miller writes, "It
is thus impossible for the grandiose
person to cut the tragic link between
admiration and love. In his compulsion,
he seeks insatiably for admiration of
which he never gets enough because
admiration is not the same thing as
love." End quote. Unconsciously, the
person may desperately want someone to
see through these defenses to truly
understand the pain underneath. But most
people are fooled by the false self. And
those who do see through these defenses
are often rejected before they have a
chance to expose the underlying shame.
So anger and resentment build. There's
often contempt toward people who are so
easily fooled by this facade. And this
contempt reflects the depth of unmet
emotional need that lies underneath.
the individual can't face the
unspeakable loss that motivates their
pain and necessitates these defenses.
And so they end up sort of rediscovering
the same feelings of rejection and
conditional love over and over again as
they move through life, unaware that the
very thing that allowed them to survive
childhood is now costing them real
intimacy and meaningful connection.hi everyone this is just a brief video
to bring your attention to a recent
article on scientific Americans website
discussing pathological narcissism and
NPD the article is titled what is
narcissism science confronts a widely
misunderstood phenomenon and a couple of
things are notable about this article
first it features Jacob Skidmore over at
the nameless narcissist Channel and also
Tessa from the spirit narc Channel both
of these individuals identify as
self-aware narcissists who are working
to spread helpful humanizing information
about this form of mental illness and I
applaud both of their efforts the other
thing about this article that was
notable is just how much it gets right
about pathological narcissism and NPD
it correctly identifies both the
grandiose and vulnerable facets of this
disorder it accurately describes the
diagnostic controversies surrounding NPD
it focuses on the work of two prominent
researchers in the field Elsa running
Sam and Aaron Pincus Aaron Pincus was
the one who developed the pathological
narcissism inventory and I've referenced
each of them and their works on this
channel
one thing that I was particularly
impressed with and this is a small but
important detail in the original Greek
myth of narcissus he wasn't in love with
himself he was in love with the image of
himself that he saw reflected in the
water but that he believed was another
being and this is a small detail but it
makes a world of difference in how the
myth of narcissus is interpreted and
also has bearing on how we conceptualize
the disorder that bears his name
NPD is not about self-love it's about
the pursuit of an idealized image and
feelings of emptiness and despair when
that image is unattainable
the article also correctly notes that
vulnerable phases of NPD are often
associated with self-harm and even
suicide
it discusses the possible genetic and
developmental origins of pathological
narcissism and NPD noting that it's a
partially heritable disorder and also
describing the common histories that
many narcissistic patients report of
emotional neglect cold or callous
treatment from caregivers and
overvaluation for what they could do
rather than for who they were on the
inside long story short this is a rare
article on NPD meant for public
consumption that gets it right it
presents the human face of pathological
narcissism it presents its complicated
history in the fields of psychology and
Psychiatry it describes the current
Diagnostic and theoretical controversies
surrounding this disorder and it also
touches on the growing consensus among
clinicians and researchers alike that
vulnerability is actually at the core of
pathological narcissism
so follow the link in the description
and check it out and until next time
take good care
[Music]
foreignhi everyone my name is Dr Mark Eaton
welcome to heal NPD pathological
narcissism is a form of mental illness
that causes unstable self-esteem it's
also often associated with arrogant or
dismissing attitudes toward other people
occasionally the grandiosity breaks down
into feelings of worthlessness
depression and an intense need for
reassurance from others these Dynamics
can be difficult to understand but by
viewing them through the lens of
attachment Theory we can obtain insight
into where they come from how they
develop and perhaps most importantly how
they can be
[Music]
treated according to attachment Theory
we're all born with an instinct to form
attachment bonds with one or more
significant caregivers this instinct is
embedded into something called the
attachment system which helps regulate
the child's proximity to their caregiver
during the first few years years of life
the caregiver functions as a secure base
a stable and attentive Foundation of
care and reassurance from which the
infant or young child can begin to
explore their world whenever things get
too upsetting the attachment system
kicks in causing the child to cry or
cling to their caregiver in order to
reestablish the feeling of Safety and
Security these interactions repeat
themselves many times a day during the
first four years of life the child feels
distress the attachment system is
activated the child cries the caregiver
responds and Safety and Security are
restored over time these patterns of
interactions are organized into
something called internal working models
these are unconscious expectations about
how Human Relationships work there's an
internal working model for the self and
there's a corresponding internal working
model of other people these internal
working models combine in predictable
ways to form attachment patterns in
early childhood attachment patterns are
observable measurable and relatively
consistent throughout development they
can be correlated with all sorts of
outcomes attachment Studies have
followed subjects through infancy
childhood adolescence and adulthood
looking at how attachment influences
things like peer relationships mental
and physical health and partnering
childhood attachment patterns eventually
turn into adult attachment patterns this
chart shows the four adult attachment
Styles and how they relate to underlying
internal working models of the self and
of other people on the x-axis is model
of self which is also sometimes called
attachment anxiety and on the y axis is
model of others which is also sometimes
called attachment avoidance these
dimensions of attachment anxiety and
attachment avoidance combined to form
four prototypical adult attachment
patterns the first secure attachment is
defined by a positive model of self and
a positive model of other people the
self is viewed as worthy of love and
others are trusted to give love and
support this results in low attachment
anxiety and low attachment
avoidance the next preoccupied
attachment is defined by a negative
model of self with a positive model of
other people the self is perceived to be
unlovable but others are perceived as
capable of providing love and this
results in high attachment anxiety and
low attachment avoidance there's a
tendency to be preoccupied hence the
name with obtaining and keeping the love
and support that the person needs but
that preoccupation is dominated by
anxiety that the love will be withdrawn
and the self will be abandoned this
style is correlated with higher levels
of dependency and
insecurity the next dismissing avoidant
attachment is defined by a positive
model of self and a negative model of
other people the self is perceived to be
worthy of love but others are seen as
incapable of providing the love that the
self needs this results in low
attachment anxiety with high attachment
avoidance the self turns away from
Intimate Relationships often developing
dismissing attitudes toward other people
and a kind of compensatory self-reliance
this style is associated with feelings
of self-sufficiency low levels of
emotional intimacy and independent
attitudes toward life the final category
is called fearful avoidant attachment
it's defined by a negative model of self
and a negative model of other people in
this pattern the self is perceived as
Unworthy of love and others are seen as
incapable of providing the love that the
self needs this results in high
attachment anxiety with high attachment
avoidance the person may Express a
confusing combination of attachment
seeking behaviors that are marked by
ambivalence and mixed messages they want
love but they feel they don't deserve it
and they also fear that others will
reject hurt or abandon them this style
is associated with higher levels of
mental
illness since attachment looks at a
person's underlying model of self and
other people it's useful for examining
many forms of mental illness including
pathological narcissism a number of
Studies have drawn conceptual and
empirical relationships between
attachment Styles and pathological
narcissism in my own research I found
that grandiose presentations of
pathological narcissism are associated
with high levels of attachment avoidance
while vulnerable present ations are
associated with high levels of
attachment avoidance combined with high
levels of attachment anxiety and here's
why grandio narcissistic presentations
involve a defensive positive model of
self and a negative model of others this
combination of positive model of self
and negative model of others is
consistent with dismissing avoidant
attachment meanwhile vulnerable
narcissistic presentations involve a
breakdown of that defensive positive
model of self which exposes the
individual to an underlying negative
model of self the combination of a
negative model of self and a negative
model of others is consistent with
fearful avoidant attachment these
relationships between pathological
narcissism and attachment are important
because attachment studies can draw
direct lines between early care
experiences and adult Psychopathology
and that's because attachment
researchers have studied parent child
interactions categorizing infants into
attachment categories during the first
few years of life and then following
those children through development and
into adulthood looking at pathological
narcissism through the lens of
attachment provides a glimpse into the
internal working models of grandiose and
vulnerable narcissists and it also gives
us Clues concerning how those internal
working models were formed for example
Studies have found that infants who are
high in attachment avoidance usually
have caregivers who show less
sensitivity these care caregivers tend
to handle their children roughly to
display threatening or angry behavior
toward their children and to actively
reject their children's attachment
behaviors they also tend to restrict
emotional expressiveness they tend to
appear rigid or detached when relating
to their children and they reward their
children's positive emotions while
ignoring or rejecting their children's
negative emotions some studies of early
attachment also show that caregivers of
avoidant children display open
aggression toward their children or
intrusively interrupt their children
when they're engrossed in play this
insensitive rejecting and intrusive
quality of interaction creates a
negative model of others and therefore
high levels of attachment avoidance
these children learn that their
attachment seeking behaviors are likely
to be rejected and instead of expressing
their attachment needs these children
learn to deactivate their attachment
system through something called
displacement they can be observed
focusing intently on neutral objects in
the room when they're separated from
their caregivers or becoming so
engrossed with a toy that they may
appear to not even notice when their
caregiver leaves the room they don't
look distressed however physiological
measures like galvanic skin response and
heart rate show that these children are
in fact upset when left alone by their
caregiver they've simply learned not to
express their attachment needs openly
they're being taught to ignore them and
over time this form of regul ation
becomes autonomic and unconscious
resulting in the avoidant attachment
patterns that we see in adults both
avoidant children and pathological
narcissists appear to have experienced
an early emotionally invalidating
environment in fact when describing the
early experiences of narcissistic
patients Otto kernberg wrote quote
chronically cold parental figures with
covert but intense aggression is a very
frequent feature of the background of
these patients end quote both avoidant
children and pathological narcissists
seem to have experienced parental
pressure to hide negative emotions and
instead display emotions that are
pleasing to their caregivers they
learned to disconnect from their
authentic feelings to turn the volume
down on their attachment needs
eventually appearing not to have any
attachment needs whatsoever they were
forced to adapt and this adaptation
gradually became unconscious they
learned at an early age to place their
focus on things instead of people to
pretend not to be upset not to have
needs and not to want emotional intimacy
or closeness in psychodynamic
terminology this adaptation is called a
compensatory false self the false self
produces a defensively positive
self-image that revolves around
self-sufficiency the individual May
believe that they don't need anyone that
they're perfectly fine on their own and
for some this defensive self-sufficiency
is is also accompanied by pessimism or
even aggression toward other people who
have only ever been experienced as a
source of frustration and
disappointment indeed there are striking
similarities between dismissing avoidant
individuals and classic descriptions of
grandiose narcissism dismissing avoidant
adults lack empathy they're insensitive
to social cues they're self assured
dominant controlling competitive and
arrogant all those descriptions are from
the empirical literature on dismissing
avoidant attachment
but they sound like they were lifted
directly from the DSM descriptions of
NPD although dismissing avoidant adults
appear to have higher levels of social
competence they utilize defensive
strategies to cut off or minimize
distress related AFF effect that is
associated with experiences of rejection
and this defensive strategy is identical
to the one that individuals with NPD are
thought to use dismissing avoidant
attachment is conceptualized by one
researcher as quote a way of maintaining
aining positive self-image in the face
of rejection by attachment figures end
quote that researcher goes on to
describe the use of emotional distancing
and defensive development of a model of
self that is quote fully adequate and
hence invulnerable to negative feelings
which might activate the attachment
system end quote and this strategy Bears
much in common with earlier described
psychodynamic models of the grandiose
false self just as in dismissing
avoidant attachment individuals with
grandiose narcissistic presentation use
an unconscious strategy of ignoring the
authentic needs of the self there's an
adaptation to disavow subjective
distress but just as with avoidant
children the distress rages under the
surface in effect grandiose narcissism
involves two models of self superimposed
on each other one is defensively
positive while underneath lies a
negative model of self that is hungry
neglected needful chaotic and filled
with dis out experiences of rejection
and intolerance of its own attachment
needs when the grandiose model of self
breaks down it exposes the individual to
the underlying negative model of self
and we call this vulnerable
narcissism vulnerable narcissistic
presentations are most strongly
correlated with fearful avoidant
attachment patterns like dismissing
avoidant attachment this pattern
involves a negative model of others and
is therefore high in attachment
avoidance but unlike missing avoidant
fearful avoidant attachment also
involves a negative model of self this
attachment pattern has been described as
stemming from a particular style of
parenting that leads the child to
believe that others are uncaring and
untrustworthy and that the child
themselves is unlovable according to one
researcher adults who are fearfully
avoidant quote desire social contact and
intimacy but experience pervasive
interpersonal distrust and fear of
rejection this results in sub objective
distress hypers sensitivity to rejection
and active avoidance of social
situations where rejection could occur
like vulnerable narcissists fearful
avoidant adults display High dependency
on others from whom validation is needed
to maintain self-esteem the tenuous
balance between subjective awareness of
loneliness and isolation and mistrust
and resentment of potential attachment
figures leaves both fearful avoidant
adults and vulnerable narcissists
susceptible to feelings of depression
shame Fame and low
self-esteem now I want to be clear that
I'm not making the claim that dismissing
avoidant and fearful avoidant attachment
styles are really pathological
narcissism rather I'm making the
observation that these patterns produce
symptoms and interpersonal dynamics that
are very similar to pathological
narcissism we all have attachment
patterns and since there's only four
prototypical adult patterns many people
likely fit into dismissing and fearful
avoidant categories but that doesn't
mean there all narcissists attachment is
superimposed on other aspects of human
psychology this presentation is simply
looking at one form of mental illness
pathological narcissism through the lens
of attachment and when we do that a
picture begins to emerge of a child who
was discouraged from showing how they
really feel what they really need they
were pressured to pretend to be okay by
caregivers who punished or ignored the
child's authentic emotional needs and
who reward a pretend version of the
child that showed them what they wanted
to see this Dynamic resulted in a model
of others that's negative others are
experienced as untrustworthy or even
dangerous emotional intimacy is actively
avoided but it also results in a pretend
positive model of self this pretend self
is without significant attachment needs
it doesn't feel distress or need comfort
it's defensively grandiose
self-sufficient and in perfect alignment
with its own Ideal Image in order to
Short Circuit any experience of distress
that might activate the attachment
system that it's not allowed to have but
this positive model of self is built on
a shaky Foundation it's always in danger
of collapse when the floor finally does
give out the positive model of self
falls apart exposing the grandiose
narcissist to the underlying negative
model of self the place inside where all
those unmet and disallowed attachment
needs were hidden so many years before
and this is called narcissistic collapse
the individual now has a negative model
of self and a negative model of others
they experience high levels of
attachment anxiety combined with high
levels of attachment avoidance they
don't know where to turn and they're in
crisis as I've stated in previous
episodes some individuals with NPD
seldom if ever experience such collapse
others seem to live in a chronic state
of collapse and these two quote types of
narcissist are separated into categories
of grandiose and vulnerable narcissism
but the reality is that most people with
NPD uh display a complex mix of
grandiosity and vulnerability there may
be areas of functioning that are well
defended and others that are dominated
by vulnerabilities in the defensively
positive model of self flaws in the
armor so to speak so why do some people
with NPD seem to have stronger grandiose
defenses and a more robust positive
model of self well that's a good
question and one that hasn't really been
answered my own research has looked at
the contribution of peer rejection in
later childhood and Adolescence as one
possible contributing factor bullying
and other forms of social rejection May
weaken the defensively positive model of
self to the point of chronic collapse
other contributing factors may involve
Aces or adverse childhood experiences
like physical abuse sexual abuse verbal
abuse or significant household
dysfunction that would ER erode the
defensively positive self model via
trauma and persistent emotional
overwhelm despite the widespread online
pessimism concerning treatment for NPD
viewing these issues through the lens of
attachment provides hope for Meaningful
change it is possible to change your
attachment style as an adult to achieve
something called earned secure
attachment moreover once it is
understood that the dismissing devaluing
and unempathetic attitudes often
associated with pathological narcissism
are really about attachment avoidance it
becomes possible to connect with the
underlying vulnerability and emotional
pain that causes those attitudes in the
first place attachment avoidance is
about having been rejected ignored or
punished for having emotional needs when
you were very very young somewhere deep
inside there's a scared hurt and abused
child who's very alone narcissists tend
to be hard to reach because they're
frightened like the avoidant child in
attachment studies they've learned to
quote turn off their emotional distress
and to hide their need for comfort and
reassurance those needs are hidden by a
suit of armor called The False self that
pretends to have no needs whatsoever
it's as if the child were clothed in a
suit of protective armor whose heaviness
forced him to grow into grotesque shapes
and drained him of energy worse yet
after wearing the armor for some years
the growing body become so structurally
distorted that the armor can no longer
be taken off even though the dangers
against which it protected have passed
when this armor fails that unsupported
authentic self is exposed and a collapse
occurs this collapse is characterized by
attachment anxiety the defensively
self-sufficient narcissist is suddenly
profoundly dependent on other people for
help and reassurance but they're still
dominated by attachment avoidance and
this now fragmenting self structure has
nowhere to turn for help this is when
things like suicide and self harm become
particularly
dangerous the small child operating the
suit of armor is now exposed vulnerable
afraid and stuck between the need for
support and the absolute Terror that no
such support can ever be
found if you identify with any of what
I'm saying here try to use it as a road
map for beginning to address these
issues
the beauty and elegance of attachment
theory is that it simplifies complex
phenomena it distills everything down
into a couple of easily understood
Dimensions the need to feel good about
the self and the need to feel that
others can be trusted try to recognize
that the grandiosity you may feel isn't
who you really are it's a defensive suit
of armor that you develop to support
yourself when no one else would
vulnerability and collapse are simply
what happens when that armor breaks down
the scared hurt or angry person
underneath represents a part of you that
never received care or support you got
so good at hiding that part of you that
you may not even recognize it as being a
part of you most of the information
online about NPD is unhelpful at best
because it lacks a fundamental
understanding of the defensive
adaptations that characterize
pathological narcissism and therefore
it's missing the key ingredient that
everyone needs to understand and heal
from these issues
empathy narcissism can only be properly
understood through an empathetic frame
the hurt child at the center of
pathological narcissism is ignored by
caregivers then ignored by The
Narcissist themselves then misunderstood
and ignored by society and that's the
tragic nature of this disorder the false
self is so good at hiding the hurt child
that nobody ever sees them and they go
on hurting and trying not to hurt via
problematic relationship behaviors that
sometimes end up hurting others when you
experience a collapse into vulnerability
try to use that as a window into that
central pain that hurt child don't try
to get away ignore or punish that part
of yourself that's what caused the
problem in the first place instead try
to get closer try to call upon the
grownup parts of of you to see that
child compassionately and
empathetically recognize that these
vulnerable feelings of Shame
embarrassment longing fear depression
loneliness dependency and even rage
belong to a hurt child narcissism is
about hidden pain and the antidote is
empathy you can extend that empathy to
yourself find the hurt child inside the
suit of armor discover the basic
goodness of that child witness the
pressure that child feels to be perfect
self-sufficient and without emotional
needs instead of rejecting or punishing
that child for existing inside of you
try to treat that child with compassion
and
love and see what
happens okay so that's it for today if
you have questions or comments leave
them below and if you found this helpful
give it a thumbs up subscribe and tell
your friends until next time take good
[Music]
carehi everyone my name is Dr eatonson
welcome to heal NPD so my last video
blew up a little bit and it brought a
lot more viewers to my channel and
overall I think that's a good thing
because I want this channel to grow and
to reach as wide an audience as possible
but with the new viewership came uh lots
of comments that were negative paranoid
and some that were downright abusive I
spent a lot of time over the last couple
of weeks combing through the comments
and responding to all the ones that I
felt were in good faith I of course
deleted the ones that I felt were
abusive toward me or toward people with
NPD I don't tolerate abusive comments
toward any individual or group on my
channel
so today I'd like to discuss one of the
main themes that I noticed emerging in
the comments section of my last video
and it's the question of whether people
with NPD are aware of the harm that's
caused by their actions
[Music]
so I noticed several main themes when
reading the comments of my last video
some like the idea that narcissists are
evil demons from hell don't Merit
serious time or consideration I'm not
interested in discussing the
supernatural here I think about mental
illness in terms of psychology not
ghosts and goblins but other comments I
feel reflected the widespread confusion
and misunderstanding surrounding this
disorder here's a brief sampling
they're victims of Early Childhood
trauma but they chose the wrong path and
they dehumanize themselves by becoming a
false being
The Narcissist grew up with manipulation
they'll get close to someone just to use
and Destroy them love is viewed as a way
to get stupid people to do what you want
they're not victims on the contrary
they're fully aware of what they're
doing
they're not traumatized at all they
enjoy torturing you
now here we have four people who seem to
believe that they have the one true
understanding of narcissism yet the
first two comments say that narcissism
is the result of early trauma and
manipulation while the second two say
the opposite that there's no trauma
history for narcissists whatsoever and
this is kind of a major issue and it
serves to illustrate how many people out
there think they know what narcissism is
when they really have no idea
but despite their differences each of
the comments I just cited subscribes to
the idea that narcissists are aware of
the harm that their actions cause to
those around them and this was a very
common sentiment I believe it's fueled
by videos like the one from Dr Romani
that I referenced in my last video that
lead people to believe that as a general
rule narcissists are intentional Bad
actors that they make calculated
decisions to hurt or harm other people
for their own benefit or Amusement to
quote the comments they'll get close to
someone just to use and Destroy them
they're fully aware of what they're
doing they enjoy torturing you
now I don't know this for sure but I
imagine that many of these same
commenters would actually agree that
narcissism is a mental illness
if that's the case then they don't seem
to really understand what that term
means mental illness isn't just some
label to describe aberrant Behavior it
influences thoughts feelings and
perceptions
in many ways having a mental illness and
being fully aware of what you're doing
are mutually incompatible propositions
and that's because mental illness skews
how we see ourselves and how we see
other people it changes what we can be
quote aware of
it causes us to rely on a limited set of
inflexible coping strategies and it
makes it difficult to learn and adapt to
new information
due to their mental illness narcissists
are frequently unaware of how other
people really see them they may believe
that other people are idealizing them
when in fact other people are really
rolling their eyes at them or they may
believe that other people hate and
despise them when in reality most people
aren't even noticing them
distorted self-image skews their
perception of circumstances and of
relationships they may perceive
competition or threat where none
actually exists they may be prone to
intense feelings of rage and resentment
in response to minor slights that most
of us wouldn't even notice
the wrong look or tone of voice can
magically represent a major insult or
injury to someone with NPD they may
think your mortal enemies because of
something you said absent-mindedly at a
party three years ago that you don't
even remember but that just so happened
to intersect with that individual's
fragile self-esteem in such a way that
they've been ruminating about it ever
since
they may have engaged in hundreds of
hours of fantasy fights and arguments
with you the thing you said that you
probably don't even remember saying may
be a centerpiece a fragile self-esteem
that haunts that individual late into
the night and around which they've
rallied considerable internal resources
the world can be a terrifying
claustrophobic zero-sum place when
viewed through the Kaleidoscope of
distorted self-perception that is common
in NPD
mental illness also makes individuals
with NPD more reactive and more
impulsive while someone without mental
illness may have the internal space to
consider multiple interpretations of an
event and to consider multiple ways of
responding before deciding on a course
of action
someone with NPD or pathological
narcissism may not be able to think
about alternative responses they may
simply Act
often in cluster B disorders one of the
main functions of behavior is simply to
expel unwanted thoughts and feelings
that the fragile self-structure can't
contain
people around them may have the
experience of being a human Dumping
Ground and that's because to a certain
extent they are The Fragile self of
someone with pathological narcissism or
NPD typically can't tolerate certain
thoughts and feelings and it must
evacuate them and this evacuation often
takes the form of projection acting out
or impulsive destructive or
self-destructive behaviors
now sometimes these are premeditated
decisions but often they aren't often
they're more like reflexes
one of the main approaches in treating
NPD is called mentalization-based
therapy this approach is focused on
helping the individuals to develop more
sophisticated models of their own mind
and of the minds of other people it
helps them to create more space to think
about why they feel a certain way
because there's a natural deficit in the
ability to think about thoughts and the
ability to model the self and other
people in NPD another popular treatment
is called transference focused
Psychotherapy and that involves helping
the individual with NPD to become more
aware of the ways that they misperceive
interpersonal situations
like anyone individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD act
according to their perceptions
can we really say that someone quote
knows what they're doing when their
underlying perception of events is badly
distorted and given the internal
discontinuity that's common in cluster B
personality disorders like NPD
perceptions can shift dramatically over
short periods of time
someone who was idealized is now
devalued someone who was loved is now
hated someone who was a friend is now an
enemy
Etc these shifts are often sudden and
Global they occur with little to no
warning and with little to no awareness
on the part of the person with NPD
everyone around them is aware of these
shifts and they're often shocked and
confused by them this is actually a
major principle in the treatment of
personality disorders like NPD and BPD
the patient may treat you like a savior
one week and like a threat to their very
existence the next week with little to
no awareness of that disparity this
phenomenon is called splitting and it's
very well documented in personality
disordered individuals
what most people don't understand about
splitting though is that it changes
perception of the present moment and
also of History it's not just that
you're suddenly bad in the narcissistic
individual's eyes it's also that
suddenly you were always bad
everything you've ever done is suddenly
perceived through this new lens of
Badness
the global shift in perception causes
people with pathological narcissism and
NPD to behave in incredibly inconsistent
ways but to someone who doesn't
understand splitting it might seem like
the narcissist is just incredibly
hypocritical or that they were just
using them all along lying and deceiving
them at every turn but in reality it's
often the case that the narcissist's
entire perception has shifted due to
internal events that are beyond their
own awareness
now it can be difficult and confusing
for laypersons to understand what mental
illness looks like when it presents as
NPD and that's because most narcissists
aren't bouncing off the walls they don't
usually present in a way that quote
looks like mental illness they typically
look put together they're often Charming
charismatic gregarious they may be the
life of the party or the leader of a
community
but they can also come completely undone
in the right circumstances and if you
look at the person's relationship
history you'll typically see a blighted
hellscape of broken relationships burned
Bridges seething resentments and
emotional pain
if you get them talking about themselves
in a deeper way you'll quickly come up
against glaring limitations in insight
and self-awareness and if you push past
the superficial charm you'll find
someone who's often profoundly confused
about life and about human relationships
and this is what it means to say that
narcissism is a mental illness the
person's ability to understand their own
behavior is often compromised their
perceptions are often distorted the
sense they make from interactions and
from relationships is often nonsensical
but they can't see it
the grandiosity and periods of inflated
self-esteem that occur in NPD can cause
the person to feel temporarily proud of
horrible Behavior to justify and
rationalize insensitive or abusive
treatment of other people again this is
often a matter of seeing the world and
one's own choices through a distorted
lens
now you can say that they know what
they're doing
phrase kind of loses all meaning once we
look at the distortions and
self-perception inherent in the mental
illness of NPD now you should absolutely
100 percent not tolerate abusive
behavior from anyone in your life
you should absolutely learn all you can
about this disorder if you feel it's
negatively impacted your life or your
relationships learn to set adaptive
boundaries learn to behave assertively
and to communicate effectively if you
have doubts about whether or not you
deserve good treatment from other people
take a look at those doubts with the
help of a licensed mental health
professional I have no problem with
people taking their emotional and mental
health seriously sometimes the answer is
to cut problematic relationships out of
your life as a teacher of mine once said
sometimes the most compassionate thing
you can do is say no but should you
spend every waking minute in distorted
Echo chambers that amplify your pain and
resentment while promoting models of
narcissism that are only Loosely based
in actual fact
no I don't think you should I don't
think that's necessary or helpful
if you've gotten to the point where you
earnestly believe that people with NPD
are demons from hell or sadistic
Predators who enjoy torturing other
people for their own amusement or that
they're representative of a new species
of human that preys on the rest of us
then I'm sorry to say I think you've
gone down an unhelpful path
if you've gotten to the point where you
react with moral outrage to the moderate
reasonable perspective that people with
mental illness are mentally ill then you
need to spend less time in polarizing
internet forums
and if you can't tolerate hearing that
someone with narcissism or NPD is
suffering then you need to take a step
back from this issue because you're
becoming radicalized the reality of NPD
is often the opposite of sensational
narcissists are not happy
they often feel empty inside their lives
are frequently a never-ending cycle of
repetitive maladaptive patterns of which
they're only vaguely aware I've met so
many individuals who spend their lives
searching over and over again for a
temporary hit of self-esteem that they
always think will magically solve their
problems but never actually does
real NPD is a frustrating tangle of
contradictory perceptions faulty
attributions and developmentally fixated
interpersonal strategies all of those
images online of beautiful people with
evil eyes pulling off a mask surrounded
by mystery and smoke that's not NPD and
if you think it is then you're mistaken
and I invite you to spend more time on
this channel and others like it that
present a realistic grounded moderate
and decidedly depolarized perspective on
the mental illness of pathological
narcissism and NPD
okay so that's it for today as always
please leave comments questions and
suggestions for future episodes down
below and until next time take good care
[Music]hi everyone my name is Dr Mark Eaton
welcome to heal
NPD a common misconception about NPD is
that people with the disorder never seek
treatment an even stranger and perhaps
more Insidious myth is that by simply
asking whether or not you have NPD
you've somehow proven that you don't
have
NPD these ideas circulate widely in
online discussions about narcissism
reinforcing harmful stereotypes and
ultimately discouraging people who
actually want help from seeking it so
today I want to break down where these
misconceptions come from why they
persist and how they distort our
understanding of
NPD much of the confusion seems to stem
from the fact that many but certainly
not all people with personality
disorders struggle with insight about
their condition personality disorders
affect multiple aspects of a person's
life from relationships to occupational
functioning to their own internal
experiences typically these patterns of
thinking and behaving are both
inflexible and maladaptive yet they may
feel entirely normal to the
individual for example someone with
paranoid personality disorder may
perceive the world in terms of safety
and danger and their relationships
through a lens of humiliation and
rejection likewise someone with NPD
might view Life as a zero sum game where
a person is either Superior or inferior
their relationships often involve around
feeling validated and admired versus
feeling devalued and ashamed and their
sense of self often fluctuates between
periods of grandiosity and periods of
worthlessness often without much
awareness that these shifts are driven
by internal processes rather than
external
events so given this it's understandable
why some people might assume that
individuals with NPD
would never recognize these patterns let
alone seek treatment for them but while
it's common for individuals with
personality disorders to lack Insight
it's by no means
Universal over the years I've worked
with many people with personality
disorders n PD included who do recognize
that their thoughts are
maladaptive but recognizing a problem
doesn't automatically mean having the
tools to fix it the reality is that
someone can be fully aware that their
patterns are unhealthy and still unable
to change them a related concept
involves ego syntonic versus ego
distonic symptoms which is an important
distinction that's often overlooked ego
syntonic symptoms feel consistent with a
person's sense of self they don't feel
like a problem a person with NPD May
recognize that they experience extreme
fluctuations in their self-esteem but
they might believe that the problem is
actually in other people for for failing
to see them correctly for not offering
enough admiration or for not treating
them with the recognition that they feel
they
deserve in contrast ego distonic
symptoms often feel alien and
distressing classic examples might
include depression and anxiety where the
person recognizes that something is
wrong inside and they seek treatment to
change it the DSM description of NPD
heavily emphasizes its ego Sy onic
aspects like grandiosity entitlement and
arrogance which has led many to assume
that NPD is entirely
ensonic but anyone familiar with the
disorder knows that's simply not true
one of the defining features of NPD is
periodic self-esteem
collapse people with NPD do not exist in
a constant state of EG syntonic
grandiosity when grandiosity fails when
when they experience rejection failure
or a significant narcissistic injury
they often collapse into ego distonic
symptoms like depression anxiety
feelings of worthlessness and
inferiority attachment anxiety substance
abuse and even suicidal
ideation it's in these states that
people with NPD are most likely to seek
therapy the problem is that clinicians
are rarely trained to recognize NPD when
someone Pres presents in an ego distonic
collapsed State instead such individuals
are often misdiagnosed with major
depression BPD or generalized anxiety
disorder which reinforces the false
narrative that narcissists never seek
therapy as a specialist working in this
area of practice I receive emails every
single day from people around the world
who recognize that something is wrong
and who want help a significant portion
of my practice I involves conducting
comprehensive personality assessments
and as I've said before most of the time
when someone contacts me suspecting that
they have NPD they're correct contrary
to popular belief people can be quite
good at recognizing their own
pathological narcissism so the idea that
merely asking if you have NPD somehow
means that you don't have NPD is an
absolute falsehood at its core I think
this particular misconception
rests on a heavily stigmatized
stereotype of NPD one that excludes the
possibility of insight or good faith
attempts at
self-improvement if we Define NPD as a
disorder in which a person is incapable
of acting in good faith incapable of
caring about others and incapable of
self-reflection then of course it
follows that such a person would never
seek treatment or be curious about their
condition this is unfortunately the
version of NPD that often dominates
online discourse according to much of
the internet narcissists are purely
manipulative completely devoid of
empathy malicious and predatory by
Nature do some individuals fit this
caricature sure but it doesn't capture
what NPD actually is the research and
clinical literature Define NPD as a
disorder of self-image and self-esteem
regulation while some people with NPD
exhibit manipulative or exploitative
behaviors those are not the core
features of the disorder the core issue
is an unstable self-image accompanied by
at least occasional feelings of
grandiosity when we move away from
stereotypes and look at what NPD
actually is it becomes clear why people
with the disorder do often seek
treatment most cases of NPD involve
periodic self-esteem collapse the rare
exception are individuals with comorbid
psychopathy or antisocial traits but for
the vast majority self-esteem collapses
are inevitable and when they happen they
often seek help the problem is that the
online space is flooded with lowquality
overgeneralized information about
NPD many of these sources are not based
on peer-reviewed Research or clinical
expertise take advantage of traumatized
individuals by providing easy but
scandalizing explanations and promote
armchair diagnosing and sensationalized
narratives if I didn't know what I know
about NPD and I relied only on what I
saw online I too might believe that
narcissists are evil have black eyes and
are incapable of good faith or growth
but this is not what the actual research
or clinical literature
says I recently attended an online
conference at Harvard where some of the
world's top researchers and clinicians
and PD presented their work none of them
was an advocate for the dsm's outdated
model multiple presenters discussed the
damaging myths and stereotypes that have
proliferated online their work largely
aligned with the material that I present
on this channel and I was reassured to
see that my content reflects the most
current understanding of this
disorder so if you're here it means that
you're interested in understanding NPD
Beyond convenient
stereotypes and if you suspect that you
may have pathological narcissism then I
encourage you to take that suspicion
seriously it does not mean that you
don't have NPD that's the bad news but
the good news is that NPD is not the
Monstrous Affliction you may have been
led to believe it's a mental disorder
like any other and it's one that can be
understood worked through and treated
okay so that's it for today weekly
insights is a series for paid
subscribers of this Channel and if you
found this helpful and you'd like to
have access to videos like this on a
weekly basis please consider becoming a
paid subscriber there's a link in the
description and until next time take
good care
[Music][Music]
thank you
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is Dr Mark eatonson I'm a licensed
psychologist and author specializing in
the treatment of pathological narcissism
my book is called unmasking narcissism a
guide to understanding The Narcissist in
your life it's a compassionate guide to
understanding the psychology of
narcissism and you can find it for sale
on amazon.com and at Major book
retailers I'll also put a link in the
description below
so today I'd like to talk about
integration
apological narcissism is really a
condition in which different parts of
the self are not integrated
as I've touched on in other episodes
this is thought to be due to early
experiences of relational trauma and
emotional neglect that overwhelm the
developing self with feelings that can't
really be incorporated into the
individual's identity and self-image
creating the need for defensive
adaptations that protect the child's
identity from being overwhelmed by
negative representations of the self and
also of other people on whom the child
relies
When We're Young we're especially
dependent on our attachment
relationships to provide safety and
shelter from emotionally overwhelming
and distressing experiences young
children cling to a caregiver when they
hear a loud noise or when they see
something that frightens them whenever
they feel distraught
but the sorts of overwhelming
experiences that are thought to cause
pathological narcissism typically occur
within the context of the very
attachment relationships on which
children rely for safety and reassurance
and this leaves the child stuck
for example the child may feel enraged
at a caregiver but the only way of
coping was such a strong and
overwhelming and frankly frightening
feeling is to seek the safety and
reassurance of the very same caregiver
with whom they feel enraged and
similarly a young child may feel ashamed
or humiliated by an insensitive
caregiver but have nowhere to turn for
help in dealing with those feelings
in order to protect the attachment
relationship with their parent the child
begins to split off parts of the
developing self
you know if if Mom's not an emotionally
safe person but the child has to rely on
mom for emotional safety then their only
choice is to begin to cut themselves up
into separate pieces in order to protect
their ability to rely on mom even though
she isn't safe
the good memories and the good feelings
are kept walled off and separate from
the bad memories and the bad feelings in
effect this creates two internal models
of mom and two corresponding self-images
and this is the origin of splitting and
the discontinuity of internal experience
that is frequently encountered in all
personality disorders NPD included
the personality develops around the
imperative that attachment relationships
must be protected even if it comes at
the expense of the self
I once saw a parent handle this sort of
thing beautifully their toddler was
clearly angry with them even hitting the
parent on the arm
the parent caught the toddler's arm and
sternly said no no hitting
and the look on the toddler's face was
one of competing emotions the toddler
was enraged at their parent they were
ashamed at being reprimanded and they
were also in need of comfort
Ed by the very same person who's causing
you to feel the strong feelings of anger
or hatred or shame in the first place
and this is the predicament of all young
children
and here's what the parent did they saw
the look of Shame and anger on the
child's face and they mirrored it
briefly with their own expression then
they quickly shifted to a look of
concern and this gave the child a
feeling that their emotional experience
had been seen and comprehended by their
caregiver
and then the parent said are you mad at
me
because it's okay to be mad at me and
you can even say I'm mad at you
and there was a look of relief on the
child's face
the child said I'm mad at you
and the parent said see you can use your
words to tell me how you feel you don't
need to hit me because that hurts me and
it makes me feel mad too and the child
said okay
and then the parent checked in with the
child to see if they wanted a hug and it
turns out that they did
interaction was a microcosm of the way
that a good empathically attuned parent
or caregiver works within the attachment
relationship to help their child learn
to integrate opposite or overwhelming
emotions
the child learns that the feelings of
anger and the need for Comfort can
actually coexist and that both feelings
can be seen and understood by the very
person that the child is angry with
the parents response provides an ability
that the child lacks the ability to hold
opposing feeling States about the same
object together at the same time and it
also provides an effective solution to
the conflict a hug a literal Embrace of
all the parts of the child now this
response if repeated often enough during
their first years of life gets
internalized and the child learns to
integrate their own internal States this
ability becomes a consistent source of
flexible moderate responsiveness to
Life's challenges they learn to work out
conflicts within the very relationships
in which those conflicts occur and they
learn to recognize their conflicting
feelings and to self-soothe more
effectively
the psychoanalyst and pediatrician
Donald winicot called this sort of
responsiveness good enough mothering
a more accurate phrase would be good
enough parenting because the relational
Matrix that produces a well-integrated
self can be created and fostered by any
caregiver a father a grandparent an
adoptive or foster parent it doesn't
have to be a mother
when it got stressed the phrase good
enough because he was aware that all
parents lose their patience
everyone gets busy or distracted and we
all have our own challenges to overcome
nobody's perfect but luckily children
are resilient
in one training I attended for something
called mentalization-based therapy or
MBT which is a popular approach for
working with personality disordered
patients the instructors estimated that
caregivers need to be optimally
responsive at least 30 percent of the
time
now I'm not sure where they got that
figure I assume it was based on
Empirical research looking at attachment
relationships over time but whatever the
case the point that they were trying to
make was that there's actually a lot of
wiggle room
but eventually in the absence of good
enough parenting a sort of critical mass
is reached and the child must instead
rely on their own immature resources to
cope
they attempt to keep their hateful or
enraged or ashamed or dependent feelings
separate from their loving Happy
idealizing Feelings they learn to
compartmentalize these adaptations
happen very early in the developing self
so early in fact that they may be
entirely unconscious
the personality develops around the need
to keep the vulnerable depressed angry
and ashamed feelings separate from the
good feelings
and this is why pathological narcissism
involves alternating states of
vulnerability and grandiosity
for some individuals the vulnerable
state is more frequently present
and for others maybe with more
well-developed defenses the grandiose
feelings tend to hold sway
but for all individuals with
pathological narcissism or NPD there's a
split in the self between good and bad
self-images good and bad feelings about
others
and these splits inevitably influence
relationships
when the narcissistic person is in a
vulnerable state others are viewed
through that lens they're seen as cold
rejecting and sensitive humiliating
critical or unavailable
in a previous episode I talked about
resiliency
people with pathological narcissism and
NPD have a very specific kind of
resiliency they develop a grandiose
false self to help protect them from
these irresolvable relational binds when
all of the bad feelings are put into one
box then all that's left are good
feelings the individual attempts to
cling to these good feelings the
divisions in the self become like two
rooms one is filled with all the
terrible stuff but the other is filled
with all the amazingly good stuff
others are idealized the self is seen as
perfect or amazing or with Limitless
potential and the person comes to feel
like this good room with all this good
stuff is where they really belong that's
who they quote really are
and we call this feeling the false self
the person tries with all their might to
stay aligned with the grandiose and
idealized self-images that live in this
false self and to avoid ever being
identified with the bad feelings
these efforts tend to look like
hypersensitivity to rejection or
criticism in relationships where any
criticism is seen as an attempt to put
the person in the quote bad room and
this is why individuals with NPD can be
so reactive to perceived slights if left
to their own devices a person stuck in
this cycle of clinging to grandiosity
and avoiding vulnerability will burn
through relationship after relationship
always perceiving the other person as
amazing and perfect in the beginning I
believe pop psychology calls this love
bombing but it's not an intentionally
manipulative process it's a natural
consequence of the internal divisions
that exist within the self over time the
idealizations begin to get contaminated
the idealized person's imperfections
begin to accumulate as do the
narcissists own inadequacies and
insecurities
the narcissistic individual increasingly
begins to perceive the other person as
attempting to sort of make them feel
like the self that lives in the bad room
with the unsolvable relational conflicts
and negative feelings of Rage shame and
dependency
but instead of understanding that these
issues actually live within the self and
they're caused by splitting the
individual with NPD perceives them as
the other person's failings and
eventually the relationship becomes so
fraught that the person is sort of
discarded at least that's often how it
feels
but from the narcissist's perspective
they simply discovered that the other
person was never the perfect being they
originally thought they were the cycle
repeats over and over
and this is where therapy and self-work
become so important
healing NPD means slowly sometimes
painfully learning to integrate the
split off parts of the self it means
beginning to understand that nothing and
nobody is perfect including the self
the intoxicating highs of grandiose
experience exist in such a pure and
addictive form only because all of the
bad stuff has been split off and
compartmentalized into a different part
of the self
the self is perceived as great and
others are idealized because of a
distortion in perception not because
anything is really that great
in object relations Theory which is a
psychoanalytic school of thought this
realization is called the depressive
position
and it represents the dawn of a new more
mature awareness and integration within
the individual where they begin to see
themselves and other people as whole
objects combinations of good and bad
qualities and feelings that can't be
separated into good and bad parts
and this mode of being represents the
end of a certain kind of magical
thinking of the less mature defenses of
splitting doing and undoing projection
and denial
flaws in the self and in other people
must be contended with
they can't be erased through distorted
thinking or perceiving
the depressive position means working
with what is rather than what we wish
things were
but it also means that we can no longer
be sort of completely overwhelmed by bad
self-images or the feeling that others
are persecutory or out to get us we
begin to see all people ourselves
included as both good and bad as
necessarily imperfect
and just like the attuned parent could
see both the hating and loving parts of
the toddler and responded to each
simultaneously a person in the
depressive mode of thinking feeling and
perceiving can hold both vulnerable
strivings and grandiose feelings at the
same time
it's a bit disappointing to lose those
High Highs but the trade-off is getting
to have real relationships and never
again having to be stuck in that room
full of split off Badness
so how can you start on this path
well the next time you feel sort of on
top of the world try to regard that
feeling a little bit skeptically
notice if you tend to think to yourself
something like this is who I really am
when you feel that way
try to remember that that feeling is
actually a distortion and just like a
prism separates wavelengths of light
into their pure colors there's a
mechanism inside of you that has
separated your feelings and perceptions
into their sort of pure wavelengths the
idealizations and the grandiosity that
you experience are only part of the
story and if you could begin to have
that awareness actively in the moment
when you're feeling these feelings then
it might help to open the door just a
little bit for some other parts of you
to show up too
and the same thing goes for when you're
in a vulnerable state this too is not
the sort of quote real you
this represents parts of your experience
that have been split off and shoved into
a dark corner of your personality
the grandiose experiences never last
forever and neither do the vulnerable
experiences
try to think of these parts of you
compassionately
imagine the child I described earlier
caught between anger and the need for
reassurance between shame and the
feeling of needing to be comforted
try to see yourself as that child and
imagine how you might respond to them if
you were their caregiver
you probably do something like give them
a hug
it might sound corny to talk about you
know hugging your inner child but it's a
cliche for a reason there's a part of
you that needs help to integrate
conflicting feelings and at some point
you learned that you can't be quote a
good person and also feel depressed or
angry or ashamed or dependent at the
same time at some point you begin to
separate those experiences clinging to
one and pushing the other away
and that strategy worked when you were
young but it's no longer viable so long
as you were clinging to the good
feelings you're constantly running from
the bad ones
as in just about every Story Ever Told
there comes a time when you must stop
running stop clinging to the preferred
experience turn around and face
whatever's actually there and I
guarantee it's not the monster you
imagine it to be it's most likely a
little child hurt angry scared or alone
it's the feeling of Shame humiliation or
disappointment it's loss
try to embrace that child and those
feelings get as close to them as you can
without allowing them to overwhelm you
take baby steps toward that part of your
experience that needs someone to see and
to understand
a little compassion can actually go a
very long way
okay so that's it for today as always
please feel free to leave comments or
questions or suggestions for future
content and until next time take good
care
[Music]
foreignnarcissism is about hidden pain and the
antidote is empathy you can extend that
empathy to yourself find the hurt child
inside the suit of armor discover the
basic goodness of that child witness the
pressure that child feels to be perfect
self-sufficient and without emotional
needs instead of rejecting or punishing
that child for existing inside of you
try to treat that child with compassion
and
love and see what happensHi everyone. This week's insight is
drawn from a section of my upcoming
video on narcissism at the neurotic
level of personality organization. That
video will look at what happens when
someone with a narcissistic personality
style moves toward greater integration,
emotional complexity, and the capacity
for self-reflection. What follows here
is a preview from that video, an adapted
portion of that script that focuses on
selfwork and internal change, especially
when therapy isn't an option. Enjoy.
I'm often asked how a person can heal if
they don't have a therapist. Is it
possible to make meaningful progress on
your own? Well, I believe it is, but
there will always be aspects of your
psychology that you won't fully
recognize because you're looking at
yourself and the world through your own
filters. We often need someone else to
help us discover things that are
otherwise hiding in plain sight. We also
need help to put words to implicit
feelings and experiences that have not
yet been symbolized but nevertheless
form an emotional backdrop of our
internal lives. Something psychoanalyst
and author Christopher Bolus called the
unthought known because personality
issues are relationally created and
relationally embedded. I strongly
believe they must be relationally
healed. However, part of that healing
also involves transforming your
relationship with yourself. So, to that
end, here are some strategies that might
be helpful. Mindfulness and present
moment awareness. This practice involves
sitting with your thoughts, feelings,
and sensations as they arise and
choosing simply to let them be. Try not
to pull them close and try not to push
them away. Treat them like actors on a
stage, each with a role to play. They
appear, recite their lines, and then
exit to make space for a new actor with
new lines and a different role in the
story. You don't need to accept
everything they say as truth. Just watch
the play unfold. These are parts of you,
yes, but they aren't all of you. Try to
tolerate the presence of thoughts,
feelings, or memories that feel
uncomfortable. Let them be. Observe them
without reacting or rushing to get rid
of them. This doesn't mean resigning
yourself to suffering. It means
cultivating a stance of openness and
allowing rather than one of resistance
and
struggle. I statements and non-defensive
communication. Recognize that everyone
has their own version of reality. Your
perceptions are no more objectively true
than anyone else's. Take ownership of
them. When expressing yourself,
acknowledge that you are the author of
your own thoughts and unique
perspective. Use phrases like, "I feel,
I would like, or I'm struggling with
rather than assuming that your
experience reflects an ultimate
truth." You have your own perspectives
and others do as well. Relationships are
about negotiating between these
perspectives. There's almost always
compromise. You can get some of what you
want, but never all of it. That's the
bad news. The good news is that the
other person must also compromise. And
if mutual compromise isn't present, then
it's probably not a healthy
dynamic.
Self-acceptance. This is related to
mindfulness. You're an evolving dynamic
process, not a fixed
entity. Allow yourself to be imperfect.
Allow yourself to have parts that need
work, parts that others don't like, even
parts that you yourself don't like.
Don't try to get rid of those parts
because it never works. Don't try to
force yourself into feeling or
performing in a way that you think will
make other people happy. Don't punish
yourself for not fitting a preconceived
idea of who or what you're quote
supposed to be. There is no supposed
to. There's a beautiful old oak tree
outside my office window. It's full of
twists and turns. Some branches are
withered, others are massive and robust.
I think all of us are like that tree.
Its shape wasn't designed. It's simply
the result of growing toward available
sunlight, drawing nutrients where it
could. That's how all of us develop. Our
early environments shape us, and we grow
in response to those conditions.
The tree's shape tells the story of its
resiliency and the compromises it had to
make to grow and survive. And one can't
appreciate the tree's beauty without
accepting this history, this shape. Try
to do the same thing for yourself. Try
to see your own beauty. It doesn't mean
you can't change and grow, but it does
mean that you can't go back in time and
be a different tree planted in a
different place with a different shape.
The world is better with my favorite
tree, twisty and turny though it may be.
And the same is true for
you. Let history be real. One of the
ways we avoid pain is by trying to
obliterate, alter, or rewrite history.
But for the world to feel meaningful, it
must be bounded by
limitations. We love people because of
their imperfections, not in spite of
them. Their idiosyncrasies, struggles,
and limitations are part of their
history, just like the shape of my
favorite oak tree tells the story of its
history and thereby adds to its beauty.
You have a history and so do I. And
neither of us can change it. We can
however shape the narrative of that
history so that it emphasizes
resiliency, growth, and connection.
While we have some editorial freedom in
how we understand our past, we can't
reinvent ourselves entirely. We must
work within the limitations of reality
and of history. Doing so allows us to
build a life of
meaning. Work to recognize and mitigate
splitting.
Splitting is difficult to recognize
because it distorts perception, but over
time you can learn to detect its
characteristic cognitive and emotional
shifts. Common indicators might include
things like black and white or all or
nothing thinking. If you perceive
someone, yourself included, as entirely
good or entirely bad, then you're likely
splitting. Rapid shifts in perception.
If someone you usually care about
suddenly seems irredeemably awful, or if
you go from admiration to disdain, then
splitting is probably at play. Emotional
whiplash. If you find yourself hating
someone that you normally love or
suddenly viewing them as embarrassing,
worthless, or persecuto, it's worth
questioning whether your perception has
temporarily shifted.
Recognizing splitting as it happens can
be enormously helpful in mitigating its
effects. If you notice yourself
splitting, you can say something like,
"I think I'm splitting right now. I need
some time to reintegrate." Simply
acknowledging this places you in a
psychological space where such
integration becomes
possible. When we're emotionally flooded
or in a more defended place
psychologically, admitting to splitting
can feel intolerable, almost as if doing
so would invalidate your entire
experience. But notice the all or
nothing distortion in that fear. You
don't have to be 100% right for your
feelings to still matter. You are the
author of your perspectives, and some of
them may be inaccurate, and that's okay.
Individuals functioning at the neurotic
level more frequently recognize and
accept that they aren't always correct.
They accept that they may misperceive
intentions, emphasize one part of an
interaction while ignoring another, or
overreact. And importantly, they don't
experience being wrong as annihilating.
Mistakes don't necessarily shatter their
self-cohesion. Being wrong about
something, even something important, is
part of being
human. Try to notice extreme perceptions
about
yourself. Extreme self-perceptions,
whether overly positive or excessively
negative, are often signs of splitting
and associated borderline defenses.
Thoughts like, "I'm the best, I'm
perfect, or I'm smarter, more
attractive, or more talented than other
people," can be hallmarks of
grandiosity, even when they contain an
element of truth. It's not uncommon for
individuals struggling with pathological
narcissism to possess legitimate talents
and attractive qualities. The key is
noticing how these thoughts are being
used. Are they surfacing as a way to
counteract more subtle feelings of
insecurity, need, anxiety, or doubt?
Individuals functioning in the neurotic
range may still reflect on their
strengths and accomplishments, but
usually not in a way that completely
negates the worth of other people. Their
positive self- assessments tend to exist
alongside an awareness of their
limitations rather than serving as a
defense against them.
The same goes for negative
self-perceptions. Thoughts like, "I'm
the worst. I'm hideous. Everyone hates
me. I don't deserve to exist." Or, "I'm
irreparably broken." reflect negative
splits in self-image. No one is entirely
good or entirely bad. No one excels at
everything and no one is without flaws.
Individuals in the neurotic range of
functioning maintain a more balanced
self view, acknowledging both strengths
and weaknesses without falling into
polarized
extremes. You're probably not the best,
but you're probably also not the worst.
You're likely somewhere in the middle.
If the idea of being ordinary in this
way feels threatening to your
self-concept, if it provokes feelings of
emptiness, insignificance, or fears of
annihilation, then you're likely caught
in a rigid and defensive state of mind
that tries to ward off vulnerability by
clinging to
extremes. Try to allow yourself simply
to be without defining yourself in
absolutes. Sit with whatever discomfort
arises. Use the mindfulness and
acceptance strategies discussed earlier.
Remind yourself that thoughts and
feelings, no matter how intense, do not
have the power to annihilate you, even
though they may feel as if they do.
Okay, so that's it for this week. If any
of this resonated with you, stay tuned
for the full video on narcissism at the
neurotic level. It'll go much deeper
into the personality organization
framework, the kinds of defenses most
often used at this level, and what
genuine psychological growth often looks
like from the inside out. Until next
time, take good care.
[Music]hi everyone thanks for joining me this
video will discuss psychodynamic
treatment approaches for pathological
narcissism briefly reviewing theoretical
underpinnings currently favored
approaches that extend from those
theoretical concepts and providing some
general guidelines for anyone working
with narcissistic patients regardless of
the model that they're using
so let's get started
pathological narcissism can be
conceptualized as difficulty maintaining
a positive realistic self-image
it's often accompanied by interpersonal
issues feelings of emptiness and
deficits and effective coping when
threats to self-esteem are encountered
pathological narcissism is often
associated with positive or negative
exaggerations and self-perception the
tendency to idealize or devalue the self
and others depression anxiety substance
abuse and even suicide
in its most severe form pathological
narcissism manifests as narcissistic
personality disorder or npd
for the first half of the 20th century
it was widely believed among clinicians
that narcissism could not be effectively
treated using available techniques this
is a myth that persists to this very day
in the public mind
and this is mainly due to outdated
psychoanalytic conceptualizations of the
disorder at the time it was believed
that narcissists could not form
object-related transferences in
treatment
meaning that they did not relate to the
clinician as though she or he were
another person from the patient's past
instead it was recognized that
narcissistic patients would form
narcissistic transferences in which they
would project an aspect of their own
experience onto the clinician since
early psychoanalytic methods focused on
working with object-related
transferences and not narcissistic
transferences
it was thought that narcissists couldn't
be treated in the latter half of the
20th century new developments in theory
and technique caused clinicians to begin
viewing narcissism in a different light
two prominent theorists focused on
developing new ways to treat the
disorder
the first
otto kernberg
worked from a perspective called object
relations
object relations focuses on how we
unconsciously perceive and relate to
other people
kernberg developed a theory of
narcissism that emphasizes internal
conflicts between emotional needs and
early frustrations
in his model
develop a pathological self that
contains deep fissures between authentic
needs and feelings idealized images of
self and others and overwhelming
feelings of envy and aggression
he developed a technique that confronts
the grandiose self of narcissistic
patients by focusing on the ways that
narcissists project unwanted thoughts
and feelings onto
and into those around them kernberg's
approach focuses on strict boundaries in
the therapy relationship
he believes that toxic aggression is at
the heart of pathological narcissism and
that it must be consistently confronted
and exposed in order for the grandiose
self to begin to relinquish its
dependency on narcissistic defenses
in contrast to kernberg
heinz kohut took a more empathetic
approach to conceptualizing and treating
narcissism
his work resulted in the development of
self-psychology
kohut identified early unmet emotional
and developmental needs that seemed to
dominate his work with narcissistic
patients
he identified a unique form of
transference called self-object
transference
in which narcissists relate to others in
a way that is designed to shore up or
buffer their own fragile self-esteem
like kernberg kohut believed that
narcissists have a fundamental confusion
between self and other
but unlike kernberg he felt that unmet
needs were at the heart of pathological
narcissism not toxic aggression
kernberg's is a conflict model whereas
kohutz is a deficit model
he focused on providing the right type
of environment in treatment for the
narcissist's underdeveloped self to grow
stronger
believing that a stronger self would
result in less fragmentation an
experience where the self seems to fall
apart and that often leads to depression
overwhelming anxiety and even suicide
kohut's method used empathy and a
concept called temporary indwelling in
which he would attempt to understand the
narcissist's inner world as though it
were his own
he would then mirror that understanding
back to the patient over time building
up feelings of safety and understanding
that the patient could rely on to keep
from fragmenting
this process was termed transmuting
internalization
in recent years researchers have begun
to realize that the theories of kernberg
and kohut may have both been correct in
some ways
but were also incomplete in others
in my perspective the best way to
conceptualize pathological narcissism is
as a series of maladaptive defenses
kernberg
built on top of fundamental relational
and developmental deficits
kohut
the deficits create a fragile self-image
that is prone to breakdown collapse or
fragmentation
while the defenses built on top create a
grandiose false self-experience that
relies on idealization entitlement and
projective defenses to keep the
underlying fragile self-image from
collapse
in other words kohut's model explains
vulnerable narcissism well
while kernberg's model addresses the
grandiose presentation
treatment principles flow naturally from
this recognition
in a vulnerable state narcissistic
patients benefit from a primarily
empathic and containing approach that
emphasizes positive mirroring
an important principle is to validate
without gratifying that means the
clinician should recognize that the
patient's striving for admiration and
validation comes from a deep place of
developmental need and that simply
giving the patient what she or he is
asking for will only keep them stuck in
the same maladaptive patterns
instead
the clinician should mirror the desire
from admiration without necessarily
handing it over
this allows the patient to slowly over
time become increasingly aware of the
underlying deficits in the self and the
vulnerabilities they produce while
simultaneously providing the experience
of being seen and cared about for who
they are
rather than for who they feel they need
to be
in a grandiose state narcissistic
patients require a more boundaried
approach that emphasizes gently
confronting the grandiose projections
and entitlements while still holding the
basic goodness of the underlying
vulnerable self
this approach requires a delicate
balancing act because grandiose
narcissistic patients often remain very
sensitive to feeling slighted criticized
or humiliated and are more likely to
react to such feelings with anger or
devaluation of the clinician
the clinician must be prepared to
tolerate such projections while
maintaining a firm sense of the
clinician's own worth
several approaches have attempted to
concentrate or manualize these
principles the first is
transference-focused psychotherapy or
tfp
developed by otto kernberg himself
tfp is a formal distillation of the
principles of his work
it consists of systematically pointing
out and confronting maladaptive
transference patterns in the therapy
and highlighting inconsistencies in the
patient's perceptions of self and others
something he believes is necessary to
help the patient form an integrated
sense of self the drawbacks are that it
can be difficult to find a trained
practitioner
and that the experience can be quite
intensive requiring the patient to
submit to a frequent meeting schedule
and agree to a very structured and at
times confrontational methodology
mentalization based treatment or mbt is
a competing manualized approach that
focuses on helping the patient to
mentalize that is to develop increased
abilities to understand their own
thoughts
and the thoughts and feelings of other
people
the ability to mentalize is seen as a
sort of buffer
a space in between thoughts feelings and
behaviors where we can watch and catch
ourselves before doing something harmful
or destructive
young children do not have this ability
they must be taught how to mentalize
through consistent empathically attuned
interactions with caregivers
mbt
borrows from attachment theory
it also employs a number of principles
developed by heinz kohut in that it
emphasizes feeling misunderstood as a
form of relational trauma that
interferes with emotional development
mbt is not confrontational
among other things the clinician tries
to monitor the level of emotional
escalation in the patient at all times
always keeping things in a productive
zone where emotional growth and insight
are possible
in my opinion
manualized approaches are valuable for
the purposes of research
we need clinicians who are trained to
provide a consistent series of
interventions in order to evaluate the
effectiveness of those techniques
but usefulness to research and
usefulness to practice are two different
things
the fact of the matter is a good
therapist will employ aspects of tfp mbt
self-psychology and a number of other
approaches as needed and this
perspective aligns well with a recent
peer-reviewed article in the journal of
personality disorders entitled
principles of psychodynamic treatment
for patients with narcissistic
personality disorder
the authors recognize that there is no
gold standard approach for treating npd
instead they recommend that clinicians
take a flexible and individually
oriented approach to each narcissistic
patient
recognizing that every presentation of
the disorder is different
for some patients a firm and somewhat
confrontational approach is required in
order to help them work through highly
problematic grandiose defenses while for
others they recommend a witnessing
approach
that emphasizes emotional holding
mirroring and validation
without gratifying the pathological need
for admiration
for any patient suffering from npd
treatment will follow a long-term
trajectory
here are some general guidelines for
therapists working with narcissistic
patients
first expect to experience lots of
pushes and pulls over the course of the
treatment
this is true for any personality
disorder but given the variability of
narcissistic presentations in therapy
clinicians should expect the unexpected
when it comes to working with
narcissists
narcissistic patients often project
unwanted aspects of their own
self-experience onto and into those
around them
clinicians may be required to tolerate
feeling worthless devalued ineffective
or even invisible
they should recognize
that these are the patients own
disavowed feelings
that the patient is managing by causing
the clinician to feel them instead
conversely clinicians may at times be
required to hold feelings of being
idealized
they may feel smart powerful even
infallible
unprepared or uninsightful clinicians
will identify with these experiences
instead of recognizing them as aspects
of the narcissistic patient's own
unconscious struggles with grandiosity
versus inferiority
second
work with narcissistic patients is
challenging to the clinician's own
narcissistic vulnerabilities
in the face of feeling devalued
ineffective or invisible clinicians may
unwittingly strike back in subtle or
even overt ways
falling into cycles of enactments that
erode the therapeutic alliance and
confirm the patient's unconscious belief
that even trusted figures will
eventually attack or humiliate them
the clinician's task is to tolerate and
metabolize these aspects of the
narcissist's disavowed self-experience
slowly and gradually feeding them back
to the patient in a modified form that
promotes healing and growth instead of
recapitulating problematic relationship
patterns
third
clinicians should be wary of taking too
aggressive or too passive a stance
the aggressive stance will only inflame
patients in a grandiose state and will
overwhelm patients in a vulnerable state
while a passive stance colludes with
grandiose strivings to dominate the
relationship in order to shut out
possibilities of feeling shame or
humiliation
at the same time such a stance will
leave vulnerable patients feeling like
maybe there's nobody there at all
instead
aim for a flexible approach that
maintains important boundaries
challenges when necessary
and perhaps most importantly prioritizes
the patient's experience at all times
finally
clinicians should not underestimate the
importance of witnessing
narcissistic patients often feel
invisible regardless of how much
emotional space they are occupying
this was kohut's main insight
the wounded self of narcissistic
patients
is in danger of disintegrating
the experience of being consistently
seen and empathically understood is the
best medicine for this condition
be cautious about responding to poles in
therapy to
do something
often
simply listening and reflecting is what
the patient needs and is actually
seeking
thanks for joining me don't forget to
leave comments and questions and to hit
the subscribe button if you'd like to be
notified about future videos i make on
the topic of narcissism
you can also visit my website at
www.dreatonson.com
and find lots more information about
narcissism from a compassionate and
non-stigmatizing perspective in my book
entitled unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding the narcissist in your
life
there's a link in the description if
you're interested
take care
youhi everyone my name is Dr Mark eatonson
welcome to heal NPD we're all familiar
with the stereotype of the vain
narcissist continually scanning their
body for imperfections a great example
might be Rob Lowe's character of Chris
trigger from the television show Parks
and Recreation
in one episode Low's character gets sick
with the flu and he's scandalized by the
loss of control that he experiences over
his body in one particularly funny scene
Lo talks to himself in the mirror and
commands his body to
stop
pooping
but all jokes aside is there Merit to
The Stereotype in this episode we'll
discuss illness anxiety and NPD
providing a psychodynamic description
that goes far beyond caricatures of
vanity for many individuals with
pathological narcissism fears about
health represent underlying Terror of
psychological disintegration
[Music]
individuals with pathological narcissism
and NPD often suffer from something
called illness anxiety it used to be
called hypochondriasis and it's a lot
more than simply checking your tongue in
the mirror illness anxiety is a
diagnosable disorder in the DSM and it's
anxiety about health that significantly
affects or disrupts a person's life and
relationships illness anxiety might
happen for a number of reasons but in
narcissism it tends to be caused by
deeply felt anxieties about loss of self
in a seminal paper titled fear of
breakdown psychoanalyst Donald winnicott
describes what he calls primitive
agonies these include difficult to
conceptualize experiences like returning
to an unintegrated State falling forever
loss of reality loss of the capacity to
relate to objects and loss of something
called psychosomatic collusion which is
the integration between mind and body
according to winacott these experiences
are difficult to imagine because our
psychologies have developed to defend
against imagining them they represent
unthought anxieties that dwell beneath
the defensive structure of Personality
they lie outside the reach of our
rational Minds
although difficult for our adult Minds
to comprehend these primitive agonies
are thought to occur regularly in
infancy and early childhood when we're
just putting together the pieces of a
self
so imagine building a tower of blocks
you know first You Begin by stacking one
block on top of the other and soon the
tower gets too tall and it falls down so
maybe you try again and this time you
try to be a little bit more careful to
better balance the blocks as you go but
inevitably the tower falls again
so on your third try maybe you create a
broader Base by using multiple blocks on
the first level and now the tower is
more stable and you can build taller but
still eventually it falls
I did this all day for a couple of years
eventually you'd have a very stable and
very tall tower so this is sort of like
how we build a sense of self
early experience can easily disrupt our
rickety block tower of self causing the
pieces to come crashing down a dirty
diaper the feeling of hunger fear of
Separation having a fever Etc babies and
young children completely fall apart
several times a day and if we try to
project ourselves into their subjective
experience we might imagine that this
repeated falling apart is actually
horrifying you completely lose control
of yourself your feelings your body
hopefully there's someone there to help
put you back together again with
patience care and empathic understanding
I think there's a reason why Humpty
Dumpty Rock-a-bye Baby and Jack and Jill
are popular nursery rhymes they all
involve themes of falling apart breaking
and then trying to put ourselves back
together again and on some level I think
we all know that these themes resonate
with early experience when we're
building a self we don't have the
conceptual tools or language to
understand what's happening it's part of
why we don't really remember those years
of Our Lives winnicott theorizes that
they're dominated by quote Unthinkable
experiences so-called because the mind
hasn't developed the ability to think
about them to represent them in a
meaningful way
they simply happen to us becoming an
indelible aspect of our self-structure
once built the self can't really think
the experience of not being a self it's
like asking an alive person to imagine
what it's like to be dead it's
impossible to imagine non-being
but the legacy of those years have
fallen apart again and again and again
remains in the form of anxiety
if good enough experience prevails in
our early years the anxieties that
remain from these so-called primitive
agonies tends to be minor
empathic care and support forms the sort
of glue that holds the self together
we're free to focus on other concerns
that don't necessarily involve
obsessional fears of annihilation but
what if good enough experience didn't
prevail
what if there were significant issues in
those early years what if caregivers
weren't mentally equipped to provide
care what if they were struggling with
their own mental illness or if there was
significant stress or disruption in the
household like Financial insecurity
domestic abuse substance abuse a lot of
yelling chaos or illness what happens
when the already stressful process of
building a self is impacted by repeated
trauma well try to imagine building a
block tower on a table that someone
keeps shaking
imagine how frustrating that would be
imagine how hard it would be to figure
out what configurations worked better
than others when someone kept coming by
and shaking the table
developing a self in a poor early care
environment is like building a block
tower on a shaky table
not only are the breakdowns more
frequent but the anxiety about falling
apart becomes a central aspect of the
self-structure that eventually emerges
from that process for individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD someone
kept sort of shaking the table when they
were attempting to build a self
the fear of falling apart becomes a
central aspect of their self-experience
part of this is due to wennocott's
primitive agonies and the fear of loss
of self
kind of anxiety is called paranoid
anxiety because it focuses on fears of
annihilation
and from a developmental perspective
paranoid anxiety is very young it comes
from a part of the self that's not at
all sure of its existence a part that's
terrified of losing control falling
apart Coming Undone and falling forever
into non-being
narcissists rely on the false self to
cover these anxieties the false self is
developed to compensate for underlying
vulnerabilities in the personality now
if the false self fails to adequately
compensate for the underlying wounds and
anxiety Then a collapse occurs and the
narcissist is exposed to the deficits in
their self-structure and we call this a
vulnerable phase of the disorder
the narcissistic individual develops a
kind of secondary anxiety and this
anxiety typically functions in kind of a
disguised way as a concrete metaphor or
something that psychoanalyst Hannah
Siegel called a symbolic equation
the mind doesn't distinguish between the
object and its mental representation of
the object in this case anxiety about
the self falling apart is represented by
anxiety about the body falling apart and
the two become indistinguishable
now as I've stated these anxieties
develop before the Mind had the ability
to represent them with language or to
symbolize them to itself with thoughts
or context they simply are they exist in
an unrepresented uncimbilized form as
primitive agonies that surface disguised
as fear of breakdown in his paper on
this topic winacott notes that such
fears seem like they're about the future
the narcissistic individual with illness
anxiety scans their body for signs of
impending illness signs that a breakdown
is going to occur sometime in the future
but the actual breakdown that's feared
has already occurred it lives in the
past and it was already survived so if
you identify as someone with
pathological narcissism or NPD and you
experience this sort of illness anxiety
know that what you're really afraid of
has already happened these fears are
relics of the past not harbingers of the
future
they exist now as well-laid Pathways in
your deep mind that surface in a
disguised form concrete metaphors for
loss of self you may not be able to
change these anxieties they may be
encoded too deeply
but you can reframe these fears as
signposts pointing to the Past someplace
you've already been rather than warnings
about the future
these fears tell a story of survival Not
Tragedy
they're evidence that you lived
in a previous episode I discussed
resiliency your illness anxiety may feel
like a weakness it may make you feel
like you can't trust your body that it's
not a safe place
but I wonder what it would be like to
reframe these fears
to see them as trophies rather than
liabilities
how would it change your feelings about
yourself and your body to understand
that your anxieties are echoes of a
catastrophe that you already survived
see how that makes you feel to reflect
on your resiliency in this way
okay so that's it for today please like
subscribe and share if you found this
helpful and be sure to leave questions
comments and suggestions for future
episodes and until next time take good
care
stop
pooping
[Music]hey everyone Dr edenson here just making
a quick video to let you know about a
recent interview I did over on the
nameless narcissists YouTube channel and
if you're not familiar with his stuff
it's a fascinating first person
perspective on the experience of NPD so
I was happy to speak with him his
content on his channel is very well
informed and we cover some good
territory the interview lasts just over
an hour so if you got the time I
encourage you to head over there give it
a watch and then head back over here and
post any comments or questions you have
down below okay thanks for watching and
take good care[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a licensed
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of narcissism and related
disorders and i'm also author of the
book unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding the narcissist in your
life
so a number of people have been asking
me to clarify the differences between
vulnerable narcissism and borderline
personality disorder or bpd
both can have similar presentations
and it can be difficult to discern the
correct diagnosis
so first let's clarify the term
borderline
at least in psychodynamic methodologies
borderline has two meanings and both are
relevant to today's episode
the first meaning refers to the severity
of disturbance in a person's personality
people with borderline level
personalities are considered to have
moderate to severe disturbances
now remember
we aren't necessarily talking about bpd
here
we're talking about a broad measure of
disturbance that can apply to multiple
personality styles
borderline level personalities rely on
psychological defenses that distort
reality
blur interpersonal boundaries and
disrupt the continuity of internal
experience
these defenses include things like
projection projective identification
denial acting out idealization and
devaluation and splitting individuals at
this level of disturbance also tend to
externalize their problems perceiving
them as coming from outside the self
they often feel like everything is
someone else's fault and they experience
themselves as essentially powerless over
their circumstances
and this feeling of powerlessness gets
channeled into rages or tantrums and
attempts to control the behavior of
other people
but they can also descend into spirals
of self-hatred and self-loathing that
can lead to self-injury and even suicide
now these sorts of issues can be found
in anyone with a borderline level
personality organization regardless of
their personality style
it's a bit confusing but just think of
borderline as referring to someone being
on the quote border between severe
personality disturbance and mild to
moderate personality disturbance
for someone to have a personality
disorder their disturbances must be at
or below
the borderline level of severity
so let's do a couple of examples to
illustrate
let's say that person one has a
narcissistic personality style but
they're functioning pretty well
they're flexible they have good insight
concerning themselves and other people
they have good distress tolerance and
they don't rely on reality distorting
defenses
we would say that that person is
functioning above the borderline level
and therefore that they don't have a
personality disorder
we'd say that they just have some
central insecurities about self-esteem
that are relatively well managed
now let's say that another person also
has a narcissistic personality style
but their issues are more severe
their perception of themself is
distorted their moods fluctuate between
extreme highs and lows and they're
hypersensitive to feeling ashamed blamed
or humiliated
and perhaps more importantly let's say
that they hold other people responsible
for those feelings
let's say that they also idealize and
devalue other people act impulsively and
fly into rages but then later act like
nothing happened
we would say that that person is
functioning at the borderline level and
therefore that they have npd or
narcissistic personality disorder
essentially they have the same
personality style the same central
issues and insecurities as the first
person but the disturbances are much
more severe
people functioning at the borderline
level often have numerous comorbidities
like depression anxiety and substance
use and if you think about it that makes
sense
someone who has an unstable identity and
unstable moods and who feels powerless
or out of control will likely develop
issues like depression and anxiety over
time and they're also more likely to
self-medicate with drugs and alcohol
okay so that was the first meaning of
borderline as a broad measure of
disturbance in the personality
now the second meaning refers
specifically to borderline personality
disorder or bpd
individuals with bpd
tend to experience others as either too
close or too distant
and they have trouble feeling
comfortable with any amount of intimacy
if someone's too close
then the person with bpd feels impinged
upon or even taken over and they tend to
react with severe anger designed to
re-establish a boundary
but if someone is too distant
then the person with bpd tends to feel
abandoned
and they may actually lash out at
themselves for not being good enough or
lovable
self-injury is common for individuals
with bpd
okay so we've discussed the term
borderline as a way of measuring the
severity of disturbance in a personality
and also as a discrete personality
disorder
so now let's talk about how npd and bpd
overlap
so for one they're both personality
disorders and that means that people
with either npd or bpd
are functioning at the borderline level
they both rely on similar ways of
defending themselves from unwanted
experience
they use projection projective
identification denial idealization and
devaluation and splitting
they both have problems with self-image
and confusions about the boundaries
between the self and others
they both want to feel loved and admired
and are also hypersensitive to feeling
rejected
and they also tend to externalize blame
for their problems
to act impulsively and to have low
thresholds for distress tolerance
the main difference is that in npd
there's typically a compensatory false
self
and that's a part of the personality
that's been split off
from deeply felt feelings of insecurity
and not being good enough
the false self strives for perfection
and narcissists seek constant infusions
of positive regard and admiration in
order to keep the false self in working
order
and in this way they're actually quite
dependent on other people for basic
self-esteem
and this dependency threatens the false
self which leads to further internal
compartmentalizations denial and
splitting now in vulnerable narcissistic
states
when the cracks in the false self begin
to show
the underlying issues in the personality
become more apparent
the self-image goes from defensive
superiority to instability and depletion
instead of self-assuredness there may be
extreme self-doubt instead of charm and
charisma social anxiety
the symptoms of vulnerable narcissism
look a lot like bpd but that's because
of the underlying borderline level
personality organization common to both
grandiose narcissism is simply a
defensive facade
and when the defense collapses the
deficits and dysfunction in the
personality become much more obvious
individuals with bpd have many of those
same deficits and dysfunctions they just
don't tend to have a defensive facade to
cover them up so i hope that clears up
some of the differences and similarities
between vulnerable npd and bpd
in many ways
they aren't really separate disorders
the structural problems in the
personality are very similar with each
and the main difference is how those
dysfunctions are expressed
and also the central preoccupations or
concerns that sort of define each
disorder
for npd the main concern is about
self-worth
while for bpd the main concern is about
managing closeness versus abandonment
now as always keep in mind that this is
just a general overview and to get an
accurate diagnosis you need to work with
a licensed mental health professional
if you do feel that these descriptions
fit your experience know that you're not
alone
both npd and bpd are treatable issues
and there's hope for healing
so please reach out with questions or
suggestions for future topics and until
next time
take good care
[Music]
youhi everyone my name is Dr Mark enson
welcome to heal NPD so I wanted to
address what appears to be a common
misunderstanding I've seen numerous
comments on my channel by viewers who
are somehow under the impression that
pathological narcissism and NPD are not
forms of mental illness here's a brief
sampling
so I found myself correcting these
misconceptions often enough that I
decided to go ahead and make a video
that explains why pathological
narcissism and NPD are absolutely forms
of mental illness and should be treated
as
[Music]
such
there are several ways that we might
conceptualize the term Mental Illness
but I thought it might be simplest to
consult the American Psychiatric
association that's the main Professional
Organization of psychiatrists in the US
and it's also the largest psychiatric
organization in the world the APA
publishes the diagnostic and statistical
Manual of mental disorders or DSM and
that's the standard classification of
mental disorders used by all mental
health clinicians in the United States
according to the American Psychiatric
association mental illness refers
collectively to all diagnosable mental
disorders and we find diagnosable mental
disorders in the DSM and that includes
personality disorders like NPD so by
definition NPD is a mental illness
because it is a diagnosable mental
disorder boom I still got it now I could
stop there but I also want to discuss
the other ways that NPD fits the
description of mental illness as
provided by the American Psychiatric
association they go on to say that
mental illness is any condition that
involves significant changes in thinking
emotion and or behavior and distress and
or problems functioning in social work
or family activities individuals with
NPD are subject to periods of
unrealistically positive self-esteem
where they may feel they're perfect
Flawless or of near infinite
capabilities these episodes are often
accompanied by marked changes in
behavior that include temporary
extraversion expansiveness taking on
more responsibilities than the person
can reasonably handle idealizing others
or devaluing them treating others with
contempt or disdain angry or entitled
outbursts substance abuse and infidelity
now individuals with NPD may also Al
experience periods of unrealistically
negative self-esteem according to the
dsm5 TR that is the most recent edition
of the DSM their self-esteem is almost
invariably fragile they struggle with
severe internal self-doubt
self-criticism and emptiness that's on
page
761 now I'm quoting directly from the
DSM low self-esteem with inferiority
vulnerability and sustained feelings of
Shame envy and humiliation accompanied
by self-criticism and insecurity can
make individuals with narcissistic
personality disorder susceptible to
social withdrawal emptiness and
depressed mood High perfectionist
standards are often associated with
significant fear of exposure to
imperfection failure and overwhelming
emotions that's on page
762 in the context of severe stress and
given the perfectionism often associated
with narcissistic personality disorder
exposure to imperfection failure and
overwhelming emotions can evoke suicidal
ideation that's on page
763 now as you can see NPD involves
significant changes in thinking emotion
and behavior it also involves distress
and or problems functioning in social
work or family activities so not only is
NPD a mental illness by definition
because it's a diagnosable mental
disorder in the DSM I still got it it's
also a mental illness because it meets
both of the apa's other criteria for
mental illness and really what else
would you call a condition that causes
distortions in self-image and
self-esteem that are so severe that the
person experiences functional impairment
across multiple areas of life and that
can ultimately lead to suicide if that
isn't an example of mental illness then
I honestly don't know what would be okay
so that's NPD but what about
pathological narcissism is pathological
narcissism also a form of mental illness
well the answer is yes and here's why
pathological narcissism is the broad
term that describes difficulty
maintaining a positive realistic
self-image accompanied by deficits in
effective coping when threats to
self-image are encountered now that
definition is lifted directly from the
research literature pathological
narcissism is the umbrella term that
describes unhealthy narcissism that is
when a person is having trouble with
their self-image and their
self-esteem narcissistic personality
disorder is one diagnosable instance of
pathological narcissism it's the main
one we think of because it's a
personality style that's defined by
pathological narcissism but pathological
narcissism can show up in many other
mental disorders as well for example
major depression often involves negative
distortions in self-image including
feelings of worthlessness low
self-esteem and problems coping with
these issues we could therefore say that
some cases of major depression involve
pathological narcissism we also find
pathological narcissism in other
personality disorders besides NPD since
many of them also involve distortions in
self-image we sometimes find
pathological narcissism in bipolar
disorders that feature depressive
episodes where the person feels wor less
and incapable or manic episodes where
the person's self-image is distorted in
a positive direction and they experience
periods of grandiosity and we also find
pathological narcissism in psychotic
disorders where the individual sometimes
experiences delusions of grandeur where
they may feel that they're the most
important person alive or that they're
literally a God on Earth while
pathological narcissism is not itself a
diagnosable disorder it still meets the
other two criteria for mental illness
established by the American Psychiatric
association as such pathological
narcissism is very much a form of mental
illness boom so I hope that clears up
any confusion out there about this issue
as always please leave questions
comments or suggestions for future
videos below and until next time take
good
[Music]
careHi everyone, welcome to weekly
insights. Grandio phases of pathological
narcissism and NPD often include
feelings of euphoria, power, and
limitless potential. In these states of
mind, individuals experience themselves
as perfectly aligned with their ideal
self. They feel beautiful, intelligent,
witty, envied, and admired. Such
feelings can be extremely compelling.
I've often heard grandiose individuals
say, "This is the real me. This is how I
want to feel all the time." But here's
the problem. The grandiose experience of
self is just as much of a distortion as
the devalued experience of self. Neither
state is realistic or stable. And those
are two necessary ingredients for
healthy self-image and self-esteem.
When someone with NPD experiences the
expansive attitudes and self-image
inflation that characterize grandiosity,
they're entering unstable territory. The
instability is characterized by two
factors. First, the grandiose self-image
itself is unstable. It's based on
feelings and external
comparisons. Feelings are inherently
transient. Neither the good ones nor the
bad ones stick around. Narcissistic
grandiosity is the product of a feedback
loop between distortions in perception
and the positive feelings that come from
those distortions which then push
further distortions. The result is an
increasingly superlative self-image that
becomes increasingly untethered from
reality. It's sort of like the
high-pitched feedback you get when you
place a microphone too close to its own
speaker. The mic picks up the sound from
the speaker, amplifies it, and then
sends it back through the speaker where
the mic picks it up again, but even
louder this time. The output keeps
feeding back into the input, which
escalates the volume. Here's an example.
I once heard a colleague describe
themselves as the best therapist in the
state when venting frustration about a
professional setback that had come up. I
immediately wondered where they derived
this self-image because not only were
they a relatively new clinician, but
they were also comparing themselves to
thousands of other clinicians whose work
they'd never witnessed. This
self-description was based, it seems, on
how they wanted to view themselves, no
doubt producing a positive feeling that
in turn encouraged them to continue
viewing themselves in a superlative
light. The problem wasn't whether or not
they were correct because who knows, you
know, maybe they were the best therapist
in the state. The issue was more how
they were distorting their own
self-image to cope with disappointment
and
frustration. By viewing themselves as
the best, they were shortcircuiting
whatever meaning they could have made
out of the actual situation. instead of
an opportunity to learn and improve. It
became a travesty in which they were
robbed of something to which they were
entitled for being the
best. The second source of instability
and grandio self-image is the pressure
that the individual begins to feel in
order to maintain it. The colleague I
described was clearly insecure about
their status. Otherwise, why would they
need to counter their feelings of
disappointment and frustration with a
declaration of their unassalable
excellence? The declaration of being
quote the best is not one that the
individual entirely believed. They would
need other people to validate that
self-perception, or else they'd run the
risk of it collapsing into the
tremendous gulf of insecurity and
fragile self-esteem that I'm pretty sure
lay
underneath. In this way, internal
pressure becomes interpersonal pressure.
The individual begins to elicit praise
and admiration from others in either
direct or indirect ways. The
conversation becomes about this need to
shore up the grandio self-image in order
to keep it from collapsing. The pressure
to do this can become so great that the
individual will actually lash out
angrily at anyone who fails or refuses
to give them the admiration and
validation that they're seeking. They
may become devaluing, critical, overtly
entitled, or even cruel. An individual
with more stable and realistic
self-esteem might recognize that they
were engaged in cruel or hurtful
treatment of other people. But
individuals who are trying to defend and
prop up a grandiose self-image can't
make such recognitions. To do so would
be to undermine the very grandiose
self-image that they're trying to
protect. And thus another positive
feedback loop is constructed. The
premise is that the self is the best.
Any evidence that runs counter to that
narrative is reinterpreted to support it
instead. The individual wasn't being
critical and devaluing. the other person
was being unsupportive. The fault lies
outside the self because if it were
inside the self, it would threaten the
unstable, grandiose
self-image. Our minds search for
evidence to confirm our biases, what we
want or need to believe about ourselves
and about the world around us. This is
one of the factors that can limit
insight in NPD and make treatment for
these conditions difficult. The
individual recognizes implicitly that
the stakes feel incredibly high. The
benefits of increased insight or having
more satisfying relationships can pale
in comparison to the existential dread
of collapse into a vulnerable, empty or
devalued self-state. This feeling of
emergency and need can raise the
psychological stake so high that empathy
becomes impaired. It's hard to think or
care about how another person feels when
you're struggling for psychological or
emotional
survival. The cruel irony of this
struggle is that it's seldom recognized
or understood by other people. What they
see is the entitlement, the grandiosity,
the insensitivity, and the devaluing
critical or exploitative treatment of
other people. And to be clear, none of
that is okay. But what others don't see
is the wounded self that produces those
behaviors. They don't see that the
individual is desperately afraid of
collapse into extremely dysphoric self-
states. They don't understand that NPD
is a trauma- based disorder that
involves dawning a suit of armor to
defend against complete fragmentation of
the self. Nor how the suit of armor
itself becomes a prison from which the
person can't escape without risking
further trauma to the already vulnerable
and wounded self. Ernest Wolf, a
frequent collaborator with Hines Kohut,
puts it like this. It is as if the child
were clothed in a suit of protective
armor whose heaviness forced him to grow
into grotesque shapes and drained him of
energy. Worse yet, after wearing the
armor for some years, the growing body
becomes so structurally distorted that
the armor can no longer be taken off,
even though the dangers against which it
protected have passed. End quote. While
Wol's quote captures the tragic nature
of narcissistic grandiosity, it's
important to recognize that this doesn't
have to become a life sentence.
Personally, I think Wolf overates the
extent to which the armor becomes fused
with the person underneath. And I also
think he underestimates human
resiliency. Yes, it can be difficult,
incredibly painful, and even terrifying
to take off the armor. Yes, it can feel
like the self will collapse into utter
worthlessness, non-being, or even worse.
But these feelings are themselves
distortions. They're based on very early
experiences, on parts of the self that
haven't matured and are easily
overwhelmed. And to those little kiddo
parts, it might seem like the self can't
support its own weight, that it needs
the grandiose fantasies in order to
function in the world. But kids can
grow. I don't care if you're 15, 35, or
75 years old. If you identify with what
I'm saying here, you can grow. It won't
happen overnight, and it won't be easy,
but I promise it'll be worth it. Okay,
so that's it for this week. Sorry I got
this one up a little late, but if you
like this video and you want to receive
videos like it on a weekly basis,
consider becoming a paid member of the
channel.
And until next time, take good care.
[Music]foreign
[Music]
just a quick video to let you know about
a recent collaboration I did with Jacob
over at the nameless narcissist Channel
we went live for almost three hours
taking viewer questions on NPD and all
things related I'll put a link in the
descriptions below so uh be sure to head
over there and check it out and while
you're there watch his other videos too
uh he presents a fascinating and
well-informed perspective on NPD from
someone actually diagnosed with the
disorder he is putting a human face to
this much maligned disorder which I
think is both incredibly Brave and
completely necessary so I was happy to
collaborate with him once again and I
think we covered some good territory so
be sure to head over there check it out
and then come on back here and leave any
comments or questions you might have for
me down below and until next time take
good care
[Music]
foreignall
right I think I'm live I've never done
this before uh so I'm uh figuring this
out as I go uh but um hi for anyone
who's here um my name is Dr Mark Eaton
I'm a licensed clinical psychologist uh
licens in the state of states of
California and New York I'm also a
specialist in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and Related
Disorders uh including PD um I'm author
of the book unmasking narcissism a guide
to understanding The Narcissist in your
life uh the books right up there over my
shoulder uh that's a Hands-On guide to
understanding the psychodynamics and the
interpersonal dynamics of pathological
narcissism and NPD written from a
compassionate and uh humanizing
perspective and it's available wherever
fine books are sold
um so I'm uh I'm
oh I can see okay there are people here
there's 23 people here uh great that's
fantastic uh like I said this is my
first outing doing a live stream um I'm
actually incredibly nervous uh hello uh
user
um I uh I had nightmares last night that
I would get in front of the camera
realize no one was here realize I didn't
have anything to talk about um and uh
and that the whole thing would just be a
flaming disaster so um hopefully that
won't happen but I thought I'd share
that with you uh in the interest of
being vulnerable and and uh accessible
and just letting people know how I feel
um but my hope is that you'll have some
good questions for me today uh and some
comments uh oh my gosh I see all these
people wow this is fantastic um I see
cluster B milkshake hi uh and uh and a
bunch of other people somebody from
Madrid Spain uh fantastic well thank you
all so much for showing up um and uh I'm
here to uh to answer your questions so
uh feel free to leave them over in the
chat
um oh okay somebody says that this
started in the middle of me mentioning
my book uh I I'll I'll just really
briefly introduce myself one more time
then my name's Dr Mark eonon I'm a
licensed psychologist and I specialize
in the treatment of pathological
narcissism and Rel
disorders okay so there's already a
question um am I familiar with narrative
therapy and do I see a parallel between
a preferred identity and a false self uh
and it looks like Bill Lumberg himself
asked that question um okay uh I'm I am
I have a passing familiarity with
narrative therapy um I have not done
narrative therapy myself nor am I
specifically trained in narrative
therapy uh I also haven't taught
narrative therapy um but I do I do sort
of know what it is and what it's about
um I think and and so I don't know
specifically about a preferred identity
although I'm imagining that from within
the narrative therapy framework uh so
for folks who aren't familiar with what
that is narrative therapy is sort of you
know we all have this way uh this story
right a narrative that we construct
about ourselves about our lives about
what's happening uh and those narratives
guide the way that we attribute meeting
to events and uh th those attributions
that we make based on the narrative that
we have are what drive you know our
emotional reactions uh they're what sort
of tell us you know what's going on and
what we should do about it so if
somebody has you know particularly sort
of maladaptive or unhelpful narrative uh
that they're they're kind of acting out
of and and uh conceptualizing experience
through um they're they're going to be
engaging in in path olical behavior um
and that's also going to going to
contribute to thing like things like
mood disorders and and anxiety disorders
and stuff like that so I'm imagining
that although I don't know for sure that
a preferred identity from within the
frame of narrative therapy uh would be
sort of um you know a preferred way of
seeing oneself um and and I I think that
that that borders on what a false self
is in psychoanalytic uh and
psychodynamic uh models although the
false FAL self is more deeply rooted I
think in unconscious conflict so it's it
is a a compensatory construct that is
developed very early in life uh in order
to defend against chronic experiences of
rejection um and um uh lapses in
empathic Attunement uh very early in
life so it's it's basically you could
think of it as the child's best attempt
to be or at least appear to be the
person that it's seems that their
caregivers need or want them to be um so
so having its roots very deeply in the
unconscious um oftentimes folks who you
know have a strong false
self-presentation that they're not aware
of it um and it's actually can be quite
challenging in clinical work to engender
insight to help the the patient get
insight into um that that false self-
experience and to begin to recognize it
as uh not you know not self
so I hope that answers your question uh
Lumberg 42 uh and thank you so much uh
for asking it oh I realized that I can
show questions okay
fantastic uh let's see I got somebody
from Kenya
here uh that's great hi thank you for
joining uh okay uh Roxy asks is
hypnotherapy useful for NPD um I don't
know um it's kind of a it's a little bit
of a Wild Frontier uh when it comes to
treatment of NPD a little bit um you
know a lot of people are trying out a
lot of different approaches uh there is
not a wide consensus uh in the field
about you know even how to best Define
uh narcissistic personality disorder and
there certainly isn't a consensus about
how best to treat it um I would say that
the leading approaches uh you know as is
typical they're um you know they're
they're sort of manualized
uh therapies and and all that means is
that somebody took kind of a a complex
uh concept concept uh and and and
distilled it down into discrete sort of
steps that a person would take a
clinician would take uh in in treating
the issue so one of those is
transference Focus therapy and the other
one would be mentalization based therapy
um also dialectical behavioral therapy
is a popular approach that's being
adapted uh it was developed for
borderline personality disorder and it's
being adapted for narcissistic
personality disorder you know uh the
thing about hypnotherapy is that there
just isn't uh to my knowledge a like a
really wide
empirical uh like a strong empirical
base uh for uh for using hypnotherapy um
you know I mostly and I'm sure I'll get
some flak for this but mostly um you
know when I've seen hypnotherapy used
it's been for things like smoking
sensation and and stuff like that um I I
wouldn't put a lot of stock in in its
ability to really make a substantial
difference in um in something as as kind
of with roots as deep as a personality
disorder uh so you know I've if if
you're if you're thinking about looking
at hypnotherapy or or something like
that I would actually steer you in a
different direction I don't think that's
going to you're not going to get the
best bang for your buck um pursuing
hypnotherapy for NPD but thank you so
much for the question
um okay Sarah Eva says does inner child
how does inner child work help with NPD
treatment um you know I I guess I'm a
from my perspective I think all
Psychotherapy is in a way inner child
work um I know that you're speaking
about a a specific approach that would
be more explicitly defined as okay now
we're going to work on healing the inner
child you know uh talking to the inner
child conceptualizing the inner child
and and you know what that child's needs
might be what the what the pain they're
holding might be and sort of talking to
that child explicitly um I think that's
great I don't I don't have any issue
with that I don't tend to do it uh so
much uh but I do often reference uh when
it feels relevant in the treatment you
know like I think there's I think
there's a a part of you here that's
that's very young or I think there's a
you know sort of a hurt child who who's
speaking uh I can I can hear that part
of you speaking when you talk about you
know whatever it is that the the
person's talking about and I do invite
patients to imagine that child and to
imagine um how they might how they might
comfort that child because I I do think
that that can be um an incredibly um
impactful um intervention and and I
think perhaps most importantly it
engenders uh self-compassion which um
the evidence shows is um just so crucial
for NPD people with NPD they they just
they don't have a
realistic uh self-image it's it's one of
the defining characteristics right that
the the self-image is not realistic uh
it's not stable uh and it's not positive
right basically positive and we need all
those three things to be true uh in
order to have a healthy self image
healthy self-esteem and the core of NPD
is faulty self-esteem management uh and
so I I do think that helping somebody to
create a more compassionate uh image of
who they are and and who they were and
how the ways that they were hurt when
they were very young are showing up in
their present-day life and motivating
some of the defenses and and other
issues that they're experiencing can be
incredibly helpful thank you for the
question yeah okay so Terry asks how
would I approach a person with NPD to
make them aware of their
condition um you know I don't I don't
have to worry about that so much anymore
because people they they seek me out you
know already kind of being aware of or
they somewhat aware of their condition
um but earlier in my career uh before I
kind of got this reputation for being a
specialist in this area um colleagues
would refer narcissistic patients to me
and and sometimes you know the patient
would have no idea that that's why they
were referred and and it would be um up
to me to find a way to sort of break
that news to them um you know I I think
the thing is um and and I'm of two minds
about this on the one hand I can see
real value to you know having a
diagnosis right have to the person you
know having that that label that that
name to put to their experience and and
that that that diagnosis can reinforce
the need for for treatment right
especially when you know they they might
go into maybe a more defended or
grandiose phase of the disorder um in
which there would be a tendency to
minimize the need for for treatment and
for help and support and that sort of
thing so I think having that kind of
like like no I'm I'm a diagnosed I'm a
diagnosed narcissist can can help a
person kind of stay grounded in the need
for treatment um during those phases on
the other hand um I don't put a lot of
stock in you know diagnosing uh for the
longest time in my career I I kind of
didn't do it unless I had to because you
know insurance reimbursement or records
release request or something like that
um and and I that's because I think in
the field there's a tendency to uh reify
um disorders so and what that means is
just basically to say well you know
something like um you know but I don't
know pick a disorder right um
it uh generalized anxiety disorder that
that that that is sort of a to to feel
like that is a disease in the same way
that you know a met like a influenza is
a disease right
that you could locate like okay this is
the virus this is the particle this is
the faulty brain circuit this is the you
know whatever it is that is biologically
based that is driving
this disorder okay so that would that
would be like reifying the disorder um
you know mental disorders they're
they're decided by committee right uh
the American Psychiatric associate
Association they get together on a uh
you know semi-regular basis they review
the literature they look at the evidence
and they say okay what you know what are
we going to call this disorder right
where where are we going to draw the
lines around this syndrome right okay
this syndrome uh okay we feel like the
evidence is substantial enough to call
this a disorder but this one over here
not so much uh and and that's a constant
process of you know review and revision
um I think it's much more helpful and
important uh in a clinical setting to be
making meaning of experience uh and to
you know so when I give patients
feedback I I'm I'm talking to them about
you know I'm I'm trying to use
experience near terminology to talk
about what they're actually experiencing
and and only every so often if it feels
like it might be helpful am I connecting
that to some conceptual you know
explicitly like conceptual framework
like a okay well this is that diagnosis
or this is this diagnosis so anyway
that's that's from a clinical
perspective from if you're just talking
about somebody in your life um and that
you think might have NPD uh the way that
I would talk to them about this is in
terms of self-esteem um and emotional
insight and um you know if they seem
like areas in their life where it seems
like there may be deficits uh or
disabilities and ways that they might be
compensating for those that that aren't
so so helpful um so I I don't think you
actually need to use the word narcissism
or NPD at all in fact I would probably
advise against it just because it's so
stigmatized uh in our culture um but I
think it's perfectly valid to talk
somebody about their self-esteem about
how it seems hard for them to ask for
help or support about how you notice
that sometimes it it seems like they're
actually feeling insecure but but maybe
they're not even aware of it um stuff
like that uh and and always is just
leaving space for disagreement and you
know for the fact that you don't
actually know what's going on inside of
them and I I think that's just good
practice across the board um and you
know people you know they have to want
they have to want treatment and and
nobody's going to go for treatment if
they don't recognize that there's an
issue uh so you know and that can be
incredibly difficult and typically you
know you're not going to be the one who
convinces them that there's an issue
typically it's going to be kind of like
uh circumstances conspiring you know
coming together uh to overwhelm
whatever defensive you know Matrix they
have going on uh and and then there's
something like a collapse and then they
might be open to uh seeking help and
those kinds of collapses they can happen
for some people you know just once a
decade and for other people they happen
multiple times a day uh and that and
that's just the variation in in this
disorder so I hope that's helpful um and
thank you so much for the
question all right so we got regj here
asking if I've thought about the use of
psychedelics and treatment of
pathological narcissism I have um and
I've actually had patients who used
psychedelics and experimented with
psychedelics and to mixed results um one
patient in particular uh was using
psychedelics and um I I would have to
say they they helped I'd have to say
they were beneficial for that patient um
others you know not so much and that's
there's such wide individual variation
um in this in this disorder um you know
for the person that it helped the way
that it helped uh was that it brought
them closer to internal experiences
against which they were heavily defended
um and it allowed them to create sort of
more space inside of themselves for
those parts of them those vulnerable
Parts those insecure Parts those ashamed
parts to coexist with you know the the
maybe more grandiose or compensatory
self-image um and uh and and that that
was a that made a that made a huge
difference um I think it's absolutely
possible to get there without
psychedelics I'm not a psychiatrist I'm
not a medical doctor this is is not me
saying hey kids go go do drugs uh this
is just me saying in my experience I
have I've seen it go both ways um and I
think there's a case to be made for um
in in in some
people a beneficial effect I think
there's also a case to be made you know
that in some people it would make things
worse um you know because uh
psychedelics they they kind of degrade
uh your experience of reality right and
and reality and fantasy become
profoundly merged uh when you're on
psychedelics um depending on the dose
and Etc and for some people that that
would be a bad thing uh especially folks
who are already having trouble kind of
dealing with you know what's real and
what isn't um so thank you so much for
the
question all right Joshua says what's
the difference between superficial charm
and real charm in association with
narcissism and is the distinction
observed in my clinical
practice um yeah you
know I have to think about this for just
a second
um okay so I there's kind of a way that
I feel like charm is charm and somebody
who Charming is charming
um I think that there can be a kind of
charm that is
about expressing
authentic uh feelings and and and you
know um
interpersonal um desires right so uh you
know um people can be incredibly
charming and vulnerable at the same time
or you know I mean and that's just
that's just kind of a gift that some
people have I feel like um the the false
self presentation that's common in
narcissism will include some element of
superficial charm uh and that's that's
the idea there is to well it's it's
overdetermined so there's on on the one
hand it's about trying to defensively
minimize you know any perceived flaws
right
so uh you know somebody who's kind of
charming and funny and witty and
whatever you know um Life of the Party
well that there's then they're they're
feeling less vulnerable they're feeling
less exposed um and and that experience
right so if they're able to be charming
and kind of um likable then other people
are going to respond you know by liking
them and by by providing positive
mirroring uh and then the person is able
to use that positive mirroring in in the
service of kind of propping up and
fortifying that false
self image uh or and by false you know
when I'm talking about false self we
could also be calling it kind of a um a
defensive positive self-image or a
defensive grandiose self-image basically
it's it's that the person feels so
collapsed and so chaotic and so empty on
the inside that there is this kind of
edifice that's constructed this armor
that's constructed on top of it and and
that's sort of where they try to to stay
but that armor needs to be constantly
reinforced uh because there's always
that um underlying dysphoric experience
that that's that's degrading that armor
and and threatening to pull them down
into um into the the sort of empty or
fragmenting experience that that's
underneath of it and so and so the
person is constantly trying to convince
themselves and convince other people
that no this is who I really am you know
um and and charm works in the service of
that and I do I see that in my practice
um all the time and um you know what I
do with it is is I I basically I just
sit with it when I when I see it um I
try not to gratify the uh the desire or
the pull you know to to positively
mirror that that false
self-presentation uh but I also try not
to to go under it because that never
works I try not to kind of you know like
try to pull the person into like because
that that would feel almost sadistic
right like let's know you're miserable
like look see um instead uh just sit
with it you know um and and I try to
validate the authenticity that's behind
it um which is you know that the person
really kind
of feels that they need to be the best
they need to be Charming they need to be
shiny and perfect and idealized in order
order to be any kind of a self at all
and that's actually if I can I try to
stay grounded in the tragedy of that and
and see The Superficial charm through
that lens and when I do that I find that
kind of however I I sit with the
superficial charm tends to be
therapeutic um as long as you try to
stay connected to the authentic person
who's underneath that so uh thank you so
much for the question uh Joshua
um have I read Nathan Brandon's six
pillars of self-esteem I've not um but
I'm I'm wondering if you recommend it
and uh you know if so um i' I'd be
interested in checking it
out okay
um let's
see
okay battle pass of the fortnite hey Dr
eonon hey
just checking in have you watched
Breaking Bad before and if so is there a
potential NPD diagnosis for Walter White
many have said that is the case though I
do not think so really you don't think
you don't think so well um I yes I've
watched Breaking Bad in its entirety uh
and I've also watched um uh Better Call
Saul and I think both are uh just
phenomenal um but I yes I do think that
uh Walter White is um a narcissistic
character uh in fact uh that is an
example that I use when I do clinical
training um so every once in a while
I'll do clinical trainings for
clinicians about how to conceptualize
and treat pathological narcissism and
when I talk about different
presentations of pathological narcissism
I use Walter White as an example of um
of covert uh
grandiosity um so you know and I don't
want to give any spoilers away if you
haven't seen Breaking Bad go watch it
it's spectacular but in the beginning of
Breaking Bad he is this kind of
unassuming high school chemistry teacher
right but the first few episodes give
you a glimpse into the covert
grandiosity that's kind of seething and
raging under the surface right um that
he feels that he was uh cheated out of
his fortune and Glory uh by his
colleagues that he resents uh his kind
of mild mannered existence uh that he
feels that he's deserves and is entitled
to um a much broader impact uh on the
world um and and and there's also a kind
of narcissistic rage that goes along
with that uh that comes out periodically
throughout the series um and and so uh
yeah I think that Walter White is a um a
fantastic example of um of a particular
narcissistic
constellation thank you so much for the
question okay one
two isn't the basic issue with mental
disorders like
NPD is is fear and how is how fear is
handled if at all or if someone simply
freezes the freezing in the face of fear
is the
worst
um I think that one of the central
experiences in NPD whether it's
conscious or unconscious is um
attachment Ang I'm sorry um attachment
avoidance uh because there's uh kind of
a crippling fear that if the if the
person gets too close to other people
that they will be exposed to um
intolerable rejection and uh the feel
and the feeling of Shame shame um and
humiliation and so I I do think that
fear uh in the form of that anxiety is a
central facet of pathological
narcissism um and and yeah the way that
that fear is handled um in the form of
typically a dismissing
avoidant
um attachment style or possibly a
fearful avoidant attachment style either
way uh the person has a tendency to
minimize their need for emotional
intimacy for closeness for attachment uh
and anytime somebody brings their own
need for attachment to that person
there's a tendency to defensively uh
dismiss um that the validity of that
person's feelings and that shows up in
the form of um what most people would
call impaired empathy and I think that's
valid but I I think that that impaired
empathy is often really about attachment
avoidance which is based on fear um so
thank you for the
question uh John J Gillan is asking if I
see NPD as someone with a disorder of
the self like James Masterson who were
never able to bring together a
constituted sense of self and if so how
to create a constituted sense of self so
yeah I think um NPD is a disorder of the
self um I tend to look at it through uh
a combination of lenses one of them is
object relations Theory one of them is
self psychology and the third would be
the Contemporary relational um model in
psychoanalysis
um all of those are just kind of looking
at different ways that the
the
um Damage Done by by chronic relational
trauma to the self emerges in the form
of narcissistic
pathology um so you know I I I think I I
don't look at it so much as a
constituted sense of self but more as
kind of a lack of a individuated sense
of self um and uh and and an attempt to
compensate for that and by individuated
I mean you know we all emerge right from
this kind of
[Music]
um f Fusion between self and other right
so the are you know over over time
during the first few years of life you
know we we kind of separate out these
mutually dependent Co originating
constructs of self and other right um
and and and those have a lot to do with
each other always and and necessarily
right so what isn't self is by
definition other and what isn't other is
by definition self and the qualities of
the self inform necessarily the
qualities of the experience of other
people um
and when somebody has not been able to
kind
of create two
distinct uh differentiated constructs of
self and others but rather they're still
kind of fused together um I think that
that that's a recipe for all kinds of TR
um and uh and you know that involves uh
boundary like profound boundary
confusions um the presence of what we
would call primitive introjects which is
sort of like the the feeling that
someone else is somehow intrusively or
um invasively a part of you uh you know
the need to rely on how other people
seem to experience you in order to
constitute sort of a sense of self
so I think there are lots of different
ways to conceptualize a self and self-
experience um and you know that this
goes all the way back to you know Freud
essentially and his notion of the ego
right um and uh so without getting to
like Technical and stuff like that
that's that's my answer um thank you for
the
question let's see
uh
so XX is asking me is it necessary for
people to know they have NPD in order to
heal and can they conceptualize their
struggles as childhood emotional neglect
people pleasing or perfectionism and
still he heal yeah yeah I don't I don't
think there's any magic in the label of
NPD I think um you know I I essentially
see uh Psychotherapy as a as a form of
reparenting um and so you know
either way whether we call it NPD or we
don't we're still dealing with um very
early uh parts of the self and their
strivings uh and um and and then on on
top of that we're dealing with the
layers of defenses um and and affect
that that have been built on top of that
kind of wounded
core I think we can we can heal that
wounded core without calling it n PD um
and and that works too yeah so thank
you Peanut's asking what are the
outcomes that I've seen in terms of
recovery from NPD and how much of a
recovery have I observed what do I think
is a realistic
outcome
um yeah so um I've I've seen lots of
different outcomes um I I have have seen
um NPD remit I've seen uh you know
patients who I would diagnose with NPD
and they no longer I would no longer
diagnose them with
NPD um as I've stated in uh some of my
videos though you know um we all have
like one or more dominant personality
Styles and those personality styles are
defined by our core conflicts and those
core conflicts are based on early
experience in combination with genetics
and temperament and whatever else right
and so um those conflicts they sit at
the core of who we are and they motivate
the defensive adaptations that we
develop that we would call personality
right um and so you know um I I use
different references for what those
personality Styles might be when I do
diagnostic assessments for NPD I use an
assessment instrument that is based on
you know kind of a a model of those
different personality uh Styles or
prototypes or syndromes um but syndromes
is a bad name because that it's it's
possible to have and this is the point
I'm trying to make it's possible to have
a person a narcissistic personality
style where your core concerns in life
are about self-worth and
self-efficacy um and for that not and
for you not to be pathological it's it's
possible for you to be a perfectly
healthy individual who just happens to
be motivated by some insecurities about
whether or not you're good enough um and
I I think we see that a lot um that
particular personality style like when
we watch the Academy Awards you know
like I think that that that there's a
way that that personality style tends
toward um performance and tends toward
you know try trying to be larger than
life to get seen to get
validated but that's not necessarily
intrinsically pathological um I think
that when it when it becomes
pathological is when those concerns are
so big and so Central and they take up
so much space inside that they derail
the person's life and and they um start
getting in the way of holding a job of
having mutually satisfying relationships
of having realistic stable and positive
self-esteem um when that's happening
that's when we start when we would call
it pathological narcissism and when that
is so um when that's taking up so much
space in the person that their whole
world revolves around it that's when we
call it
NPD um so when somebody has
NPD the the goals that I have in mind is
to increase their ability to tolerate
the es and flows of positive and
negative
self-esteem increase their capacity to
have a a realistic self-image um and
through the use of you know kind of the
therapeutic relationship over time to
help build a more stable internal
Foundation um such that the the
self-esteem isn't fluctuating so widely
um and so there's more stability of
self-esteem so basically to to lessen
the amount of distress that is
experienced by the person and with lower
distress and greater stability um you
you're going to have fewer problems and
that
um personality disorder is going to
shrink down to something that's more
manageable maybe it only shows up in a
few places in their life or maybe only
when they're really triggered or really
overwhelmed or something like that um
and and at that point we would say oh
well there's not a personality disorder
anymore now it's just a kind of a
circumscribed issue and you know they
can stay in therapy and keep working on
it and and I I often recommend that they
do um I you know how often does that
happen well that's that's hard work
right uh there's a book I've got on my
shelf here
um let's
see
yeah okay
uh characterological transformation the
hard work Miracle this is by Stephen
Johnson highly recommend Stephen Johnson
love his stuff he's also got another
book called humanizing The narcissistic
style I don't know if you could hear
that my I wasn't looking at the camera
humanizing the narcissistic Style
Stephen Johnson uh he's one of my heroes
um highly highly recommend it it's
clinical stuff it's written for
clinicians but it is good stuff um and
you know he calls that kind of
transformation the hard work Miracle
right so it's not easy takes a long time
uh it takes commitment and dedication um
but it is absolutely possible
um so I I hope that answers your
question
let's
see uh good question okay T Wells is
asking do people with NPD have a true
self I've seen the work of C of a
certain
Professor uh is that that vacan not sure
um well known on YouTube who says they
don't it's so disheartening and it keeps
me stuck in hopelessness
well um yes yes there is a true self
okay so what what does it even mean
um here's the problem and I just I
responded to a YouTube comment on
another video this morning to this
effect the person was basically saying
well there's no true self to heal so
healing is impossible right and and
that's a
philosophical debate you know is there a
true self or isn't there a true self
well I don't know and and neither does
anybody else and there's really no way
to verify that empirically I mean we
might as well ask how many angels can
dance on the head of a pin you know um I
I don't know right and and furthermore
it's not my place to to posit you know
whether or not a person has an authentic
self or a true self versus this false
self but I think that they necessarily
have to have a true self uh whatever it
is that's under the false
self-presentation and that maintains the
need for a false self-presentation I
would call an authentic self and that
that can be rooted in biology it can be
so deeply unconscious that it's just
rooted in biology right and Bessel
Vander Bessel Vander culk uh you know
his body the I'm sorry his book the body
keeps the score talks about this a
little
bit um but basically he's talking about
embodied trauma right uh trauma that
can't be processed up here but it's felt
in here somewhere uh it's upset stomach
or it's you know whatever it is right um
that is an authentic experience right
it's it's just encoded at at the level
of of the somatic um but there are also
people you know whose whose false self-
defenses crumble and collapse into
distress despair rage um you know you
name it uh on a fairly regular basis and
I would call all of those authentic
experiences too right anything that
isn't compensatory and that isn't
designed to put out this kind of
self-sufficient facade is to my mind
authentic experience and the goal of the
work that I do in therapy is to try to
increase the person's access to those
authentic thoughts and feelings and
experiences um and to help them
recognize that those are rooted in
what's real in what's true for them so
joy and sorrow right um and and often I
find that the
easiest uh route to authentic experience
is grief um
so going
into whatever is there that's
painful uh I I I feel like that is
typically
authentic um so that's my answer I you
know gosh I'm so sorry to read that
you're feeling disheartened and
hopeless I don't think I just I don't
think you need to feel that way I don't
um I think that it it can certainly seem
hopeless and especially if you like look
on YouTube for more than 10 minutes um
you know yeah that that's a bleak
landscape um but uh in my experience the
authenticity is absolutely there 100% um
and it is also typically accessible
um although there are some heavily
defended presentations where the
grandiosity is is fused with a kind of
sadism and a kind of psychopathy and a
kind of aggression
uh we would call that malignant
narcissism um and uh and and that that
presentation that's a tougher nut to
crack no no pun intended and don't mean
to I realize that could be uh I'm not
calling people nuts uh just using the
idiomatic expression but anyway um
that's a that's a harder problem to
solve um and that's because the
experience of vulnerability is quickly
short-circuited uh and turned
into sadistic aggression
um and um you know I I would say that's
that that's a that's a less positive uh
prognosis um again not hopeless uh if
anytime there is buyin and the person
wants to get better I believe
firmly uh with 100% of my being that it
is possible to
heal
okay I was wondering if I could talk
about Jennifer says I was wondering if I
if I could talk about what to expect as
a person with NPD ages gets into their
70s and Beyond does does npt Behavior
NPD Behavior change with age yeah I was
just reading a a thing uh about this uh
today um let me see if I can find
it longitudinal course okay here we
go
uh let's see
okay yeah longitudal course
uh and now that I moved I resized my
window and I lost it hold on one sec
okay so this is this is taken from an
article in Focus the lifelong Journal of
learning in Psychiatry um Elsa
ronningstam and um and uh eagle
or uh Weinberg are the authors uh it
appeared in
2022 okay and they say
um that overall Studies have documented
the Persistence of narcissistic
pathology even among patients who who
improve symptomatically okay so by the
way this is without treatment right this
is just kind of what happens as a person
gets older patients with the disorder
tend to improve slowly and gradually and
Rapid improvements have not been
documented Studies have used categorical
diagnosis of the disorder and tended to
oh studies that have used categorical
diagnosis of the disorder have tended to
document symptomatic improvements
whereas studies that relied on
dimensional measures have tended to
demonstrate
stability okay um so what they're saying
is it's in part how you conceptualize
the disorder um
so uh but but they're also saying here
um if there is paranoid thinking
antisocial traits and EG syntonic
aggression so kind of what I was just
describing in response to the other
question uh those things impede
Improvement um other things like history
of adversity employment or interpersonal
functioning have not been tested uh and
they've got sort of a chart here um and
they're saying you know according to
these different studies here's what
they've found um the one that that has
the oldest population is ages 18 to 60
that's Durban incline published in 2006
and they say that uh there's a stable
course in the disorder so it really
doesn't get better as a person ages um
without
intervention okay uh
so that's just one study um but you
know that's what the that's what the
empirical literature suggests so thank
you for your question um oh my gosh
there's so many questions I just I'm
only like six minutes in to the to the
questions I'm gonna have to do this
again uh but I'm just I'm overwhelmed by
um how many people have showed up and
how many questions you have so thank you
um let's see oh uh
gosh uh thank you Crispen I'll I'll take
the compliment um thanks I'm I'm doing
well uh let's
see how do you know if a narcissist is
willing well they they go to
therapy
um
whoair uh since the range of behaviors
of someone with NPD May fluctuate
between let's say NPD BPD and HPD and
paranoid avoidant Etc isn't it more
accurate to look at someone with NPD as
someone with Bo instead BPO I'm assuming
means borderline personality
organization uh yeah I I do in fact um
anytime a person has a personality
disorder I'm immediately thinking them
as borderline personality organization
and for anybody who doesn't know what
that means
um one way of conceptualizing
personality is to look at it on a
developmental Continuum okay we at the
bottom you've got something called
psychotic organization and at the top
you've got healthy personality
organization and in between psychotic
and healthy uh you've got borderline and
then you've got neurotic each of those
is defined by a part of the personality
that is
not um totally developed okay so uh in
The Psychotic organization you're
talking about somebody whose kind of ego
capacities are so underdeveloped that
even kind of dealing with the
distinction between reality and fantasy
is
problematic um it does that's not
doesn't mean they have schizophrenia now
this is this is kind of like a a a way
of gauging the severity of a personality
organization um somebody who's uh got
the borderline personality organization
okay they're on the border between
psychotic and neurotic okay because
when
psychoanalytic theories were first being
developed you know everything was
neurotic or psychotic right uh neurotic
means that they've sort of successfully
navigated the edipo conflict um in
Freudian terms but in in more
contemporary terms neurotic means that
they're they are capable of having what
are called whole object relationships uh
so that means that remember earlier I
was talking about how the self and the
object kind of
separate into these distinct constructs
that are still mutually dependent but
distinct inside the person that when a
person does that that's the neurotic
personality organization there's a clear
sense of self and there's a clear sense
of other people and they they're not
kind of Blended together in this kind of
soupy mix that gets really confusing for
the person for somebody at the
borderline level that's when their self
and other are still kind of in mesed
okay and that results in very
problematic ways of thinking feeling and
relating because the distinction between
self and other is not clear and so they
tend to rely on U problematic defenses
like projection projective
identification um splitting uh acting
out stuff like that okay
so and that and those are the kinds of
defenses that tend to uh Define
personality disorders across the board
um and so yeah I I I think of person
borderline personality organization
that's my primary thought when I'm
working with somebody who has a
personality
disorder but um not all people have NPD
right there are pathological narcissism
presentations that I wouldn't put in the
borderline range I would I would see
them as kind of hovering uh in the
neurotic low neurotic to very high
borderline range but maybe most of the
time in that kind of low neurotic range
um and uh and so I don't think that
looking at it in terms of BP is is more
helpful in in those instances I also
think that um there's something to be
said for okay so broadly speaking the
personality is organized in a certain
you know
uh Stratus of of you know development
right but um each personality disorder
uh is defined by Central characteristics
Central ways of Defending um against
charact you know Central issues that are
that Define that particular personality
disorder uh and so I think that it's
helpful to retain the idea of NPD for
that reason as well um thank you so much
for the
question let's see
uh
do I know anything about how to treat
HPD histrionic personality disorder or
any experts you know focused on how to
treat HPD I don't know any experts
focused on that
um I think by and large when we're
talking about cluster B personality
disorders with the exception of
antisocial personality disorder the
treatment approach is going to be
similar um and that's why you know
things like DBT and and MBT uh are being
adapted originally developed for
borderline but being adapted for NPD um
and I think the same goes for HPD as
well um I do I have treated patients
with HPD um and uh you there's just some
different things to watch out for
different you know counter transference
polls uh in the in the treatment
relationship um tend to rely on slightly
different characteristic defenses but I
think by and large cluster B personality
disorders again with the exception of
antisocial uh are about a wounded Andor
fragmenting experience of self uh and
confusion between self and others um and
and they tend to be acted out they tend
to externalize that conflict and acted
out in their uh close
relationships are all vulnerable
narcissists introverts introverts this
is from our divine Mouse Overlord uh who
looks like he's um I don't want to I
don't to piss this guy off he's got a
he's holding a Cleaver um but uh are
they all introverts or have I met
exceptions okay so this is a great this
is a great question um first of all uh
the idea that there are vulnerable
narcissists and grandiose narcissists I
think is misleading um I think that all
narcissistic presentations involve kind
of a smush of grandiose and vulnerable
aspects
um so you know but that being said uh
some configurations are more prone to
narcissistic collapse than others and we
could call that vulnerable narcissism
but I I don't think that they're
necessarily introverts I think that a
person can be extroverted and also
vulnerable what what really makes the
distinction between vulnerable and
grandiose kind of phenotypes is um is
the ease with which the grandiose
defenses crumble into the fragmenting
self-experience
underneath uh let's
see are they looking to create new
therapies for
NPD uh yeah I would say yes
um you know transference focused
Psychotherapy is a is a good example of
that that's created that's developed by
Otto kernberg and he's a famous for you
know um a famous object relations
theorist uh and and clinician
um uh you know and his whole career is
about NPD um and
so he developed tfp uh specifically you
know for NPD
essentially let's see many of the
Concepts and ideas I present sound
applicable to many forms of Personality
Disorder or childhood trauma what makes
NPD treatment specific in comparison
yeah well that's because they are um
again it this and this gets into the
previous question about borderline
personality organization um the
personality disorders H are remarkably
similar um in many respects and this is
one of the reasons why you know I'm
always online you know in my videos
being like well this is a mental illness
right this is there's there's nothing
fundamentally different about people
with NPD that sets them apart as
incurable or untreatable or the devil
incarnate or or whatever it is right
that the kind of stigma is suggesting
um personality disorders are personality
disorders and uh they they're they tend
to you know have very similar
Central um deficits and uh and and
then some characteristic ways of
compensating for those deficits um and
uh and NPD the deficit is about
self-esteem uh and and the
characteristic way of compensating has
to do with the grandiose false self or
compensatory positive model of self
that's developed and that then is prone
to collapse exposing the person to those
Central
deficits
okay Orin considers NPD a manifestation
of cptsd that's that's complex
post-traumatic stress disorder that's an
upand cominging way of conceptualizing
trauma I happen to agree um I do think
that NPD as well as most personality
disorders uh are manifestations of
cptsd any substantial success in healing
by S I'm not sure what SE is um but EMDR
that's eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing mindfulness Etc I think
mindfulness is great um I think
mindfulness is it's I recommend it to my
patients um I think that that's a great
way to develop self-compassion it's a
great way to increase your ability to
tolerate distressed States uh without
acting them out uh it's a great way to
um increase your Insight and um and your
empathy
EMDR uh gosh I don't know much about
EMDR that's not it's not something I've
ever really looked at very
closely um I do I and I I might get this
wrong but uh I was uh I went to a
training once and they were talking
about EMDR and I remember the kind of
the takeway takeaway of it was that EMDR
is great for discret traumatic events
uh but it's maybe not so great for
chronic uh or complex uh trauma and I
don't know if that's true or not uh it
might not be but that's that that was
the takeaway at one training that I
attended so if I'm wrong about that I
apologize all all the people out there
who have benefited from EMDR or practice
it um anyway thanks for the
question
uh Lumberg is asking is there a notion
of things as mirrors instead of people
is mirrors yes yeah um so what we're
really talking about is self-object
experiences um self-object experiences
or any experience that's used to shore
up reconstitute or Define the experience
of self um when we're very young
self-object experiences tend to be um uh
more about you
know uh other people right they tend to
be like you know I idealize dad and and
dad is a selfobject to me and so you
know therefore I'm great too or you know
I remember when I was a kid I wanted to
be Indiana Jones uh and Superman right
those were my idealizations because I
was a kid in the 80s and um so those
were self objects for me right um and
and I you know the qualities of super
man uh I took those in as interjects and
they they became in some way you know
Central facets of who I was at that
particular point in time Luke Skywalker
was another one
um so so but as we get older right our
self-object experiences they tend to be
be less concrete and tangible and more
abstract right so now you know my
self-object experience isn't Superman
right or Indiana Jones or Luke Skywalker
it's you know I my profession is is a
self-object experience for me right it
helps Define who I am uh my role in my
family uh my role in my community right
um th those kinds of things my identity
as a as a citizen of the United States
things things like that um so so those
are kind of age appropriate self-object
experiences um when when a person
experiences a lot of trauma a lot of
Developmental you know Interruption and
stuff like that when they're very young
they tend to persist uh in the use of
those tangible
concrete uh selfobjects um and and they
tend and they tend to be inflexible
about it so I need you to see me this
way in order for me to feel like a good
person and if it seems like you don't
see me this way right in in between
these two right if you're over here now
you're a bad object get you know and and
then there's a whole thing about that so
um so that so that would be an age
inappropriate selfobject um using other
people as selfobjects is age
inappropriate when we reach adulthood uh
but you know um somebody who's kind of
in an inflexible space where they're
really reliant on concrete self-object
experiences for self-esteem yeah they
might see a dirty kitchen sink as as a
that that could cause a collapse right
um that's 100% possible so yeah thank
you for that
question uh let's
see ribbon spice do I have advice for
writing characters with NPD
empathetically um yeah stay close to the
to the central wound um and to
the uh empty uh or fragmenting self
that's underneath the grandiosity uh
so let's see
at peace with not knowing what can a
close friend or partner of someone with
NPD do to support them in a vulnerable
state
um just be there but in a well
boundaried way so I you know my videos I
often talk about the importance of
boundaries right it is it is possible to
be kind and to be empathetic and also to
have boundaries uh so anytime you're
you're dealing with somebody who's got
any personality disorder or any kind of
really provocative interpersonal
presentation boundaries are going to be
key um be very clear for yourself where
your boundaries are and hold those
boundaries um because the nature of
personality disorders especially is to
pull people out uh of their kind of P
pull people into violating their own
boundaries because the the person person
with a personality disorder their
boundaries are are kind of non-existent
right because the self is not completely
emerged from the object so you got these
this kind of selfobject self you know
object Fusion happening um and and so
they will pull for in a you into um into
enactments that that violate your own
boundaries um so it's very important to
have firm boundaries but also to be kind
and supportive um and you know that that
looks different for each situation um
but I think those are the that's that
would be the guiding principle um that
and uh I guess I would say you want to
validate without gratifying um so uh the
person if they're in crisis they they
they they want gratification right I I
have a need meet It event immediately
right the the pressure behind my need is
so great that I need for you to
meet it right here right now um and and
often in order to meet that need you
would have to violate a boundary uh one
of your own boundaries and so hold the
boundary validate the feeling of Crisis
or pressure or emergency behind what
they're saying but don't gratify what
they're asking for if it violates your
boundary um
gosh guys I'm get I'm getting a little
tired here but I I'm I'm uh interested
in in
continuing uh maybe until about 3:30 if
possible
um so I'm gonna I'm not going to keep
answering every question uh because I
think there's a lot of questions um but
I'm going to look and see if I can pull
out uh ones that might
be more broadly
um
applicable okay why do people with NPD
keep repeating the same patterns of
behavior and never learn from their
mistakes over and over
again um low Insight uh that's that's
essentially what it is that and um and
splitting um so splitting is best way to
think about splitting is this uh imagine
um an an AR pelo okay like Hawaii okay
so the Hawaiian Islands look like
separate Islands from the surface of the
ocean if you go underneath the ocean you
see that they're all connected they're
all part of the same mountain chain
right and these are just the peaks of
these mountains sticking up above the
surface of the water but if you don't go
underwater you just see separate Islands
okay so what psychology is learning is
that um none of us have kind of like a a
unipolar self okay there's no sort of
central
stable um construct that is self what we
really have are multiple selves uh and
ideally those multiple selves are well
integrated the lines of communication
between them are robust uh and and the
transition between these different self
States is uh smooth and not disruptive
to the person's functioning and to their
relationships okay so you can could
think about these as centers of
emotional gravity you could think about
these as different ways that the self
has come to be defined in relation to an
experience of other right so there's a
self for me that's kind of defined in
relation to my mother there's a self for
me that's defined in relation to my
father there's one that's defined in
relation to my best friend in grade
school to my second grade teacher to my
boss to my spouse to my you know right
okay so all these different
that are defined in relation to all
these different experiences of other
people ideally the difference between
all those is mild it's it's there's not
huge Stark differences and where there
are Stark differences um there's a lot
of communication between all the other
parts right
okay what can happen uh in especially
personality disorders is that all those
different self States
uh become like separate islands of
experience uh where the communication is
poor between them where a storm
happening on one of them you know isn't
storm can be happening on one of them
but not on another one uh each has their
own distinct ecosystem right okay so
this I'm starting to kind of wear out
the metaphor
but basically uh these these separations
between these self states are uh
reinforced
uh via dissociation and Trauma okay so
it it prevents the person from
integrating all these different parts of
themselves all these different centers
of emotional gravity and what you end up
with are uh
siloed you know parts of the self um and
so when the person is on you know Maui
right it has nothing to do with what's
going on on aahu uh or when they're in
one Silo it has nothing to do with
what's in the other Silo okay and so the
transition between those different self
States can be incredibly abrupt um and
uh and and typically when the transition
happens there's very little memory of
what it was like in The Other Self state
right because again the lines of
communication between them are disrupted
via dissociative phenomena uh and so um
we call this splitting all right so when
a person is splitting that it's not just
that they see you through a different
lens okay they are a different self
experiencing you differently than the
self that was experiencing you five
minutes before or last year or whatever
um and and all of reality is is
Rewritten according to this new center
of emotional experiential and relational
gravity um and and so this is the this
is why the behavior of people with
personality disorders seem so
inconsistent and confusing and why one
day they're like oh my gosh you're right
I I've got a problem and I need I need
help thank you how can I get help and
then the next day they're like screw you
what are you talking about I never said
that right that that has to do with
splitting and the disruption of the
continuity of internal experience that
is part and parcel to personality
disorders and so that's another reason
why a person can repeat the same
mistakes over and over and over again in
their life and never seem to benefit
from any insight because those mistakes
are siloed you know in one kind of self
experience and and the other self-
experiences don't don't have access to
it um this is different than
dissociative identity disorder it's I'm
not talking about multiple personalities
here although I would say dissociative
identity disorder is a very very extreme
form of splitting um but but uh this is
this is something that many people with
multiple personality disorders
experience it's it's kind of um the term
would be pathon neonic or you know
characteristic of um borderline
personality disorder in particular but
also narcissistic personality disorder
um splitting so that's the answer um
thanks for the
question
Cooper is asking am I using a fancy
camera mic lighting or something simple
and do I edit my videos myself do I
teach myself about the technology I'm
using or does someone do it for
you well that depends on whether you
think things look good or
not no um so uh yeah this is all this
just me uh right now I'm using a
Logitech uh webcam that my mounted on a
tripod in front of my computer monitor
um and I've got two ring lights that
light me um and then when I make my
videos I use the Sony zv E10 uh camera
uh and I feel like it's got pretty good
results uh although it's it's a steep
learning curve how to use the camera I
had to watch a few YouTube videos to
teach me how to do that uh I do edit all
my videos myself I use something called
moav which is like a it's like a soft
software
suite um less it's less involved than
like the Adobe
products or something like d Vinci or
something like that uh I tried using
both of those and I was so quickly
overwhelmed that I just stuck with with
mavi it's it's fairly simple and
straightforward uh and once you get the
hang of you know how to do the cuts and
stuff like that it goes pretty quickly
um I ultimately I I hope to grow big
enough as a channel that I can Outsource
video editing because it takes up a lot
of time um but for now I'm a I'm a onean
operation U everything is is done by me
uh and um and I teach myself to do it
watching videos on YouTube so thanks for
the
question
uh let's
see
oh what does it mean when NPD is said to
have a schizoid
core
um okay so getting back to my my man
Stephen Johnson
um he has these great
uh
names
um for uh
different different personality Styles
okay so he
calls uh narcissism and I've said this
before in my in some of my videos he
calls narciss NPD or narcissism the um
the used child okay and what he's saying
there is that the experience the early
attachment experiences in narcissism
they have to do with a kind of
exploitative exploitative care uh where
the child feels that they're they have
to be some other version of themselves
in order to deserve love and that's the
Genesis of the false self and the the
grandiosity uh and interpersonal
inflexibility that people with NPD tend
to
exhibit so that's the used
child uh Johnson calls the skeid
experience the hated child um and that's
because um the these schizoid experience
is is dominated by
uh rejection and overwhelm um and the
person has to go inside in order to
escape an object world that seems filled
with hurtful objects um hurtful
caregivers um I think that uh NPD and
and and schizoid organizations they they
they tend to go hand inand uh not all
the time though uh I don't think that
NPD has a schizoid core um but I think
that the sorts of relational experiences
early on that tend to generate the
schizoid versus the narcissistic
experience they can be similar um so
thank
you let's see
Brandon uh says he's late um but thanks
for joining us nonetheless um Brandon
comments quite a bit on my videos and
his comments are always um well informed
uh and so uh I appreciate you you being
here
let's see
um do I know if ketamin infusion therapy
can Aid with self-abandonment I'm not
sure what that means um and I don't know
much about ketaman therapy although uh
there is another Mark Eaton who lives in
Florida who specializes in ketamin uh
therapy for I think for treatment
resistant depression uh and he's a
psychiatrist um but um anyway he he
might have the answer the the other Mark
edenson might know the answer to this
question uh and there's no relation that
I'm aware of by the way I mean there
probably is somewhere way back when but
none none
immediate uh let's
see
what uh user asks why do they find it
easier constantly seeking sources of
admiration from new people isn't that
more exhausting um well it's because
that new person isn't uh sullied by um
disappointing experience right so when
somebody's uh doing a particular version
of splitting where they're idealizing
other people people um they are
constantly in in search of shiny new
objects to idealize because uh the more
they get to know the more experience
they generate with that idealized other
person uh the harder it gets to continue
idealizing them because little
disappointments and frustrations start
to build up until eventually there's a
kind of critical mass reached and the
idealizations invert and turn to
devaluations um and that you know so pop
psychology would call that the love
bombing and discard cycle um it's based
on splitting though um not some kind of
like you know nefarious manipulation or
whatever
um but that's why that's that's why
there's a constant search for novel
objects to idealize um and because the
person is is seeking to prop up the
false self-experience via association
with idealized others um and so if the
person the other person can no longer be
idealized that jeopardizes the um
stability of the false self and so they
got to find somebody else to idealize uh
I want to emphasize none of this is like
uh premeditated right it's not like the
person is like uhoh you know the the
clock on my idealizations is running out
I better go find myself a new object to
love bomb and that's none of that's
happening I don't know if anybody out
there thinks that happening it certainly
seems like some people think that's
happening and it certainly seems like
some people are basing like their whole
career off of that idea that that's
what's happening but that's not what
what's happening at least not if we're
talking about pathological narcissism
like the mental illness of it maybe
we're talking about like somebody who's
just kind of a jerk or whatever and
maybe they're out there doing that but
um but that's not NPD
so um what else we have
uh goodness gracious there's so many
questions I'm so guys I'm just I'm
overwhelmed by how
many how many how many of you showed up
and how many questions there are here
it's I'm
like um I I wish that I could spend five
hours and answer every single one
um okay here's a good one a lot of good
questions iser
um how do I explain inability demand am
moralistic behaviors especially with
with respect to crossing boundaries
greed lying exploiting
vulnerabil vulnerability for Money
Services attention and admir okay so
basically like the unrepentant you know
uh aspects of of some NPD presentations
um
so I think that
immorality can go hand inand with
grandiosity um it's not that the person
doesn't have a doesn't know what's right
and wrong because that's they you know
they might know what the difference
between right and wrong but I think
often there's the lack of a strong uh
intrin moral compass because that would
be based on a strong set of values and a
strong set of values is based typically
unless it's some kind of crazy
inflexible radical thing um but a a
strong set of values is is typically
firmly rooted in a sense of self um and
so you know if there is not a strong
stable sense of self then there's going
to be um that's going to affect a
person's moral compass uh and they're
going to be more easily kind of BL
around by the affective forces inside of
them uh so they're going to be pushed by
pressures inside
toward um all kinds of things imp
impulsivity ways of acting out there
insecurities ways of getting immediate
needs
met um idealizations and
devaluations uh all that kind of stuff
so they're just kind of like blown
around right uh by by these things um
and as a result they often you know it
can it can uh result in in you know
criminal behavior um boundary violating
Behavior insensitive Behavior stuff like
that okay so that's how that happens but
now if you try to hold somebody
accountable for their
actions the that kind of those Silo
self- experiences I was talking about
earlier that's when they come into play
okay so when the person was acting out
in that way they might have been over
here in this Silo and now when you're
talking to them about it later they're
over here in this Silo right and so
there's a tendency to rationalize the
things that they did before so that the
justification matches the thoughts and
feelings that are available in this Silo
see they don't have access to what's
over here in this Silo right anymore uh
because of splitting and so so there's a
tendency to kind of make things up right
and they don't realize they're making
things up they they might think they're
telling you the truth
because the reasons they're giving now
are consistent with how they would think
and act in this self state but they did
the thing they did in another self State
uh and and so that's that's the
confusing piece about splitting um is
that you get all kinds of like really
inconsistent behaviors and then kind of
post Hawk rationalizations for those
behaviors that don't make any sense but
they do to the person telling you and
and you're like H this person's clearly
a liar right and they must be
manipulating me um and that's not
necessarily true they may not know that
they're lying uh and they may only be
manipulating you in the loosest sense of
the term in that uh the personality
disorder typically involves you know
interpersonal manipulation an
emotionally coercive Behavior but not
like studied manipulation typically it's
more like just behaving toward people in
a way that kind of pulls them into
providing the kinds of self-object
experiences that the narcissist needs to
sustain the false self um so uh I don't
know I hope that answers the
question let's
see um
um looks like there's a conversation
here about Psy
psychedelics lot of yeah lot of kind of
cross talk people talking about what I'm
saying as I'm saying it which is awesome
um somebody's asking if I could talk
about
splitting uh and and I I did um so
hopefully that's that was
helpful
um somebody else says Walter White is
definitely a
narcissist I
agree
uh I
say
uh okay what are my
thoughts on Psychopathic personalities
and their relation to pathological
narcissism um I so I don't think that
psychopathy is a type of pathological
narcissism I think that it's uh
different in kind not degree uh from
pathological narcissism pathological
narcissism has to do with um you know a
feeling of self that's fragmenting and
falling apart uh and then the ways that
we compensate for
that the fundamental thing about
narcissists is that they are still
interpersonally
invested uh they still even if it
doesn't feel like they need you they
absolutely need you I've never worked
with a narcissist who was not profoundly
interpersonally dependent um and The
Well of dependency that sits underneath
the grandio false self-presentation feel
feels
bottomless um and and that's because it
belongs to such a young self uh and just
think about how much little kids need
right um and so so there's this this
self-experience that sits at the center
of narcissism that is incredibly
dependent um and therefore incredibly
invested in relationship even if the
external um presentation is avoidant
right that avoidance is based on the
feel on the fear of rejection okay and
of being hurt okay so there's a
vulnerability there right when we talk
about narcissism we talk about
grandiosity we talk about vulnerability
now when we talk about psychopathy we're
not talking about vulnerability and
we're not talking about uh relational
investment okay we're not talking about
dependency we're not talking about
insecurity uh what we're talking about
is power and uh and the pursuit of power
via something called omnipotent control
which is a um it would be uh considered
to be a an early or primitive
psychological defense um where the
person is trying to literally control
other people
um that is not so much a relational
investment that it it belongs to a
younger self in other words um and uh
and and so I think that that psych
Psychopathic
personalities uh first of all they can
be influ that can be influenced by um
measurable um differences in the size of
the amydala um but uh from a
psychological perspective I would see
psychopathy as a different branch on the
tree than
narcissism all
right just got a couple minutes
left let's
see
just want to share there's a lady who
recovered from NPD called Lisa
charaba we can do it that name is
incredibly familiar to me and I'm not
sure
[Music]
why ah
uhhuh okay so I don't know if it's the
same Lisa charab but um she somebody
named Lisa charab uh reached out to me
about 9 years ago um when I first
started to specialize in this kind of
explicitly so I first started to put it
on my website and stuff like that uh
Somebody by that name reached out to me
because she had written a book called
you might be a narcissist if it's kind
of like based on like The Jeff Foxworthy
bit um and uh and she said that she had
all all these people you know seeking
help for narcissist ISM and she needed
somewhere to refer them um and she and I
had a few phone call like phone
conversations about it and um and I I
don't know I didn't hear from
her since that time so uh I I don't I
don't know if she's since kind of come
out as somebody who's recovered from NPD
um but if so you know more power to her
um and I'm glad to know that um that
there's somebody out there who's you
know um able to serve as a as a model
for how that's possible if it's the same
person I don't know if it's the same
person but it would be funny if it was
uh not funny haha but just an
interesting coincidence
anyway let's see uh we're just about at
the time here and gosh I'm so
sorry uh if I
didn't uh answer your question but
there's a lot of great questions here
I'm going to go through them and I might
end up making a video out of one or two
of these um I guess you know the last
thing I want to talk about uh
before I end um I guess you know I just
realized that I should probably talk
about some of the services that I offer
um you know as a clinician um so I offer
the following Services um I offer
individual Psychotherapy although my
current currently my individual
Psychotherapy practice is full uh but I
do have a weight list and you can access
that on my website um I also offer group
psycho therapy and that's a new service
that I'm offering uh I've got a group
going um and um and I I feel like it's
it's going well I feel like the the
group members are finding it helpful um
and so I'm interested in expanding my
group uh treatment options so if you're
interested in group therapy please let
me know you can send me an email there's
a form on my website um also a benefit
to group therapy is that it's cheaper
than individual therapy it's more
affordable and um you get a a pure
experience so you get you get to uh be
supported by more than just me um and I
think that the group members that that
are currently in my groups are finding
that helpful as well it helps with shame
embarrassment humiliation all those kind
of like awful feelings that sit at the
core helps with that uh so check that
out I also offer diagnostic assessments
and those are comprehensive Services um
there's uh somebody here who
um has been through that process um and
uh you know so um that's that's another
thing that I provide it's it's different
it's different that just like I don't
just meet with you once and diagnose uh
we meet you know for a period of a month
or more um and uh and at the end I write
I generate a comprehensive uh report uh
that you know talks about personality
Styles and the presence of personality
disorder and other uh issues that might
be going on um and I I really strive to
do that from within uh an empa empathic
and and um and compassionate and
developmentally informed perspective
okay so it's not just writing down a
list of disorders it's it's a it's a
narrative about how this how the person
got where where they are with
recommendations about what to do going
forward and I also uh offer um
consultations for family members and
loved ones those are time limited uh
typically between one and three sessions
uh and I do Reserve sometimes in my my
week uh for those so if you'd like to um
consult uh let me know again all this is
available on my
website thank you so much everyone for
being here um and uh I'm gonna gonna do
this more uh this has been um
overwhelming to me uh and I'm just I'm
so happy to know that so many people are
interested in this uh and um and happy
to be helpful if if I can so um thank
you so much everyone I'm going to go
ahead and end the stream now and um look
for this video on my YouTube channel
heel
NPD um and uh thanks again okay take
careall right well it says that I'm live uh
so I guess I have to take its word for
it uh hi everyone who's here looks like
a few people are here already uh so
happy to see
you thanks for joining uh Noel and uh
glad you're excited to be here I'm
excited to be here too although I
honestly don't know what to
expect
um I'm kind of wondering if uh hi
riverly
um hey the mastermind1 thanks for
joining um yeah I'm kind of kind of
wondering what what attendance will be
like today it's a it is after all a
Friday afternoon uh hi T Wills hi T tan
thanks for joining everyone um anyway
I'm Dr Mark Eaton um I'm a licensed
psychologist uh with an somewhat
um unusual specialty my clinical
specialty is working with pathological
narcissism and
NPD um and uh I'm here to answer
questions and uh talk all things uh
narcissism so um let's have at it I'm
wondering if anybody has any questions
to start
off hi BD Wilson Neil yeah thanks thanks
for thanks for being
here so uh let's
see T Wills uh how does how do feel
feeling switch off for someone uh we
once deeply felt for is this attachment
Theory related or specific to narcissism
and is there a difference so I I guess I
imagine what you're talking about here
is um the kind of fluctuation in the
intensity of feelings for some people
who have a narcissistic uh personality
configuration where um when there's a
breakup uh or a separation of some kind
it's almost like uh the the the love
object is just like you just kind of
don't like they just kind of cease to be
uh a factor in some way and I've heard
um a number of patients that I work with
discuss this phenomenon as well um as
far as how that actually happens um I
you know I'd be hard pressed to I think
come up with a specific mechanism um and
I I'd kind of just be hypothesizing here
uh I think you're probably on to
something when you discuss uh attachment
um so you know most if not all of the
patients with whom I've worked that I
would say had a narcissistic issue of
some kind or another um they had a
significant
um they had significant attachment
avoidance um and so you know if you may
have seen this if you watched my most
recent video uh but uh essentially human
attachment comes down to two uh
Dimensions right there's the U dimension
of attachment avoidance uh and then
there's the dimension of attachment
anxiety and I'm kind of going like this
not not because I'm intending to bless
the screen uh but because um that that
uh that configuration is typically
conceptualized uh using a chart with an
X and A Y AIS uh where the x axis is
attachment avoidance and the y- axis is
attachment anxiety um and uh when we're
thinking about attachment avoidance uh
we also call that uh sort of an internal
working model of other people um and uh
and often times when somebody has uh
experienced certain kinds of abuse or or
emotional neglect uh when they were very
young and throughout their growing years
um as well as some peer rejection
sometimes um they can be high in
attachment avoidance and that's because
their internal working model of other
people tends to be negative right so
they've experienced a lot of uh
disappointment a lot of frustration a
lot of Heartache uh with respect to
their um their primary caregivers and
other attachment figures in their lives
and so they therefore have kind of
internalized this uh negative or
distrustful model of other people um and
and really what that ends up causing uh
over time is um it sort of interferes
with a person's ability to really
feel um their you know their love for
someone else um it makes it difficult to
S to be vulnerable uh with other people
um and uh and it tends to kind of turn
the volume down on uh the various
dependency longings uh and and the the
feelings of of longing for attachment uh
and close relationships um that uh that
other people might experience and so um
another thing that can happen with high
levels of attachment avoidance is that
the person tends to get really good at
just kind of not paying attention uh to
their feelings um and uh and that's
something that you even see in childhood
attachment uh studies where they're like
observing the child um and they have
this uh situation called The Strange
situation where the caregiver and the
child are together in a room and the
researchers watch them interact for a
while and then suddenly the caregiver
gets up and leaves the room and the
caregivers watch how the child reacts to
the the sudden absence of the caregiver
when the child is in this strange
situation um and children who are high
in uh avoidance um they tend to not
react to the absence of the caregiver
they tend to focus in on neutral stimuli
a toy that they're playing with or or
whatever um and uh but if you take like
physiological readings of the child uh
like monitor their blood pressure or
their heart rate or something like that
uh you see that they are actually
distressed they're just learning to
disconnect from that feeling of distress
they're learning not to represent that
distress to themselves and they're
learning not to express it um and so I
think something like that happens um uh
when there's a breakup or there's a loss
of some kind for somebody who's high in
narcissism um they they tend to default
back to that kind of avoidant attachment
uh coping strategy where they just they
just don't think about it um and uh and
and that's one way that uh that that can
kind of play out so I hope that answers
your question uh I guess you know at the
end of the day my answer would be yes I
think that that does uh relate to
underlying attachment
Dimensions um and I don't think it's
specific to narcissism I've seen it in
other personality configurations as well
uh I think that's about attachment
avoidance so thank you uh T Wills for
the
question
um what else oh it's I always feel like
I'm in the hot seat when I'm doing this
it's a bit of a rush but it's also uh
kind of nerve-wracking so um I apologize
if it takes me a few minutes to kind of
get into the swing
here
um okay so narcissist hex I was just
wondering if you have any opinion on a
cure for NPD or if it's like a condition
like diabetes where you just manage it
well you know as I've said in uh in
other uh videos and podcasts and stuff
in mental health we don't really think
about things in terms of cures uh we and
that's because we don't really
understand the underlying mechanisms
that uh presumably are responsible for
the Psychopathology right and in fact
even when it comes to sort of defining
the
Psychopathology um that's something
that's typically you know decided by
committee more or less uh you know the
American Psychiatric association I'm I'm
referencing the DSM up there gets
together uh you know on a fairly regular
basis and they have meetings where they
review the EV
and the most recent research as well as
probably some other political
considerations uh that that they have uh
you know and they they draw new lines
around disorders right um you know well
we're gonna take this criteria out of
this disorder and we're going to add
this criteria to this disorder uh we're
going to change you know the duration of
symptoms you know to qualify for the
disorder we're going to add this new
disorder Etc um and that's and that's
because we don't really have like a
biological basis uh you know as a
foundation right validating these um
these constructs you know so we don't
have like a lab test you can't draw
blood and be like aha you've got you
know uh th such and such levels of
depression right it's it's not like uh
in The Phantom Menace right where
they're like measuring how much force
you know somebody has by by their
medoran levels it's not like that uh in
mental health and so we don't really
because we can't conceptualize it in
that kind of a concrete way we can't
really talk about cure because while the
symptoms May remit uh and there may be
substantial Improvement in the person's
life uh since we really didn't know what
caused the problem to to begin with we
can't really say well now you're cured
you know we can just say well now you're
doing better right uh or now you don't
qualify for this disorder anymore or
something like that uh and so um you
know I really don't tend to
conceptualize uh mental illness in a
biological way and so you know and
that's that might be just be my bias as
a psychologist too right I'm trained in
Psychology so I think about things
psychologically um and not not so much
neurologically and and that sort of
thing not so much medically um so when
it comes to comparing something like NPD
to something like diabetes that's the
first disconnect for me is you know
diabetes is a very well understood uh
physiological condition whereas NPD is a
not very well understood psychological
condition and even experts on NPD you
know they won't necessarily agree on the
on the core or essential features of NPD
um you know they're like for instance
I've made a number of videos about my
disagreements with the DSM model of NPD
so um so anyway that's that's kind of
like the context okay that's the frame
I'm trying to draw around my answer here
uh which is you know I guess really just
depends on the person on their situation
um and on the the specific kind of
configuration uh that of of NPD or
pathological narcissism uh with which
they're presenting um for some people I
would say that yeah this is you know
it's it's sort of it's a chronic
condition and you're and you're doing
your best to manage it and for other
people um you know there there might be
um a fairly quick or even a you know it
might take longer but there there can be
remission right um uh and and that's
again even the term remission is a
little bit problematic because the way
that I conceptualize these issues um is
really kind of like a developmental
model it's a developmental trauma uh
that that
interrupts um the the development of
whole object
relationships uh of a complex and
nuanced and realistic and stable model
of self and other people uh and because
of those issues the person ends up
having to rely on maladaptive coping
strategies to deal with all the slings
and arrows that you know life throws at
them um and then those maladaptive
coping strategies beget you know more
trauma and more issues which the person
internalizes in the form of more wounds
to the self Etc um and so if you can if
you can help the person uh begin to step
outside of that you know kind of cycle
of of of
destabilizing responses uh to to
experience um and then at the same time
be providing them with some of the
materials in in the form of you know um
validating self-object experiences and
uh the experience of empathy um and kind
of a a reparative um experience of
uh being sort of seen and mirrored and
understood uh then to my mind the self
begins to heal uh and so I wouldn't
really even think of symptoms remitting
at that point I would think of the
person developing past the the place
where they would need to be relying on
some of those maladaptive coping
strategies anyway uh I don't know if
that I don't know if that answers your
question narcissist hex I might have
just opened up you know 12 other cans of
worms uh in the in the course of trying
to answer it um but I guess I guess what
I'm trying to say is it's not so cut and
dry as just you know can we cure this or
not um everybody's different and uh and
really I I I see this you know I I chose
the word heal and P the the name heal
and PD for a reason um because I see
this as a wound that that needs to heal
um and um and that's my perspective on
it so I don't know if that answers your
question or not but thanks so much for
asking
it uh what else
okay tan do I understand correctly that
you like to use psychoanalytic and
dynamic approaches what made you decide
to stray from more common schools of
therapy and how did it show in results
of healing
patients you do understand that
correctly yeah um so I'm a I'm a
psychoanalytic psychotherapist I'm not a
psychoanalyst because that is a whole
other Echelon of
training uh you know essentially
psychoanalysts have a doctorate on top
of
their original license eligible
degree so and I don't have that um but I
have spent a lot of time um researching
and reading and uh participating in case
consultation groups and I was on the
board of directors for a local
psychoanalytic Association uh for a
number of years and I currently teach uh
psychoanalytic uh Concepts uh and
interventions uh to doctoral students um
so I you know I fairly well versed uh in
in the in the various models um in the
psychoanalytic uh
tradition um so what made me decide to
choose that well it just always spoke to
me um I feel
like uh and there's
another
uh I think he's a psychologist out there
named Jonathan shedler and he's a a an
advocate
for uh you know kind of well he's an
advocate for for psychodynamic
approaches really um and uh one of the
things that that he talks about in a
presentation and I think you can find it
online somewhere is that the tendency
toward um you know these kind of what
are called manualized therapies um and
uh and he describes therapists sort of
becoming technicians right instead of
clinicians they're becoming technicians
some who opens up the book opens up the
manual and then applies the the
intervention right whatever the manual
says the intervention ought to be and
the problem here is that um
Psychotherapy is really uh both a
science and an art right uh and the art
piece of it has to do with um and I feel
like that's in some ways the essential
piece of it which is um the ability to
to sit with human suffering
um and to
try uh against despite whatever odds you
know might be present uh either for or
against but to to try to connect with
that person on a human level um because
I feel like um a lot of the things that
cause you know the the the the car to go
off the rails when it comes to human
psychology you know has to do with um
with ways that people have just just
been damaged or hurt or wounded or
abused or traumatized uh in the context
of Human Relationships and so I see
Psychotherapy as fundamentally a
reparative process um that is uh
relational and so um you know a lot of
the kind of what you're describing as
more common schools of therapy they're
really about um you know uh okay we've
got a circumscribed disorder here right
and now we've got a now we've got a
a manualized treatment to apply to this
disorder and that's a very
medicalized way of of looking at these
things um and it's in and one of the
reasons it's that way is because it's
much easier to research things like that
so you know and I'm not I'm not knocking
it I I see the value of that um but you
know what I find is that when I teach
doctoral students who are you know
training to become licensed
psychologists
themselves they get a lot of that stuff
like they're just inundated in these you
know in like CBT and and act and all of
these kind of manualized approaches
right um that are uh empirically based
okay um which is itself a little bit of
a you know because psychodynamic
approaches are also empirically uh based
as well um and they're also empirically
validated in a number of ways but it's
it's not really the you know the brand I
guess but
um anyway they they they get these
things and these techniques they're not
that difficult to to get right but the
thing that they really struggle with and
the thing that that I find is the most
helpful for them is to talk with them
about how do we make meaning out of what
the patient is is is describing right
how do we how do you connect with this
person in a way that feels real and
authentic and have something called a
moment of meeting right a moment where
there's a connect a connection of some
kind because those are the moments that
make a difference in Psychotherapy those
are the times I think if you look back o
across your your life and you think
about well what were the moments that
really impacted me and really made a
difference for me it was a moment of
meeting of some kind a moment where you
were seen by someone else or you saw
someone else uh and something happens
there and um and and so I in my
experience the psychoan antic school of
thought um and it's various branches on
that tree but they're all uh sort of
about how do we make meaning out of this
suffering right how do we listen how do
we really listen to Somebody uh and
really sort of be curious about what
they're what they're trying to tell us
how do we how do we listen on multiple
different levels not just you know okay
what's the symptom ah this is the
intervention right and and by the way I
think there's a place for that uh but
but
for me I I've always it it's just never
been enough you know and and I've I've
done plenty of CBT you know uh I worked
for Kaiser for a year and I did nothing
but CBT and nothing but didactic groups
and and all that stuff and and I just at
the end of the day it just didn't I it
didn't feel like I was connecting with
people and it didn't feel like I was
helping them in the way that I wanted to
help them um and so I just always come
back to to psychodynamic Psych analytic
stuff and that's just where I feel most
at home um as far as you know results
um so you know there it this isn't well
known but um there's
actually uh plenty of research out there
that that demonstrates that not only is
our psychodynamic approaches on par with
uh you know sort of the more common
schools of therapy uh like CBT and stuff
like that uh but they actually surpass
them um According to some metrics and
one of those metrics is something called
effect size and what effect size is is
when you do like a um a metaanalytic
study where you take lots of different
studies and you put them all together
you need some way to to to say okay well
you know like for instance to answer a
broad question is therapy helpful well
let's look at PL like a hundred
different studies of psychotherapy right
and somehow we're gonna try to answer
the question uh is therapy helpful
that's called a metaanalytic study uh
and the way that they do that is by
looking at something called effect size
which is what is the mean difference
across all these studies what's the mean
difference um in you know in terms of
standard deviations right so
um on average right um
Psychotherapy any kind of psychotherapy
has a certain uh effect size it it it it
results in a certain mean difference in
terms of improve symptom Improvement and
you look at that um and and so an effect
size of one would be that's one standard
deviation above the mean okay so that's
considered a significant like a like a
massive effect size um anyway the point
being uh when you look across all these
different meta analytic studies what you
see is that there are comparable uh
effect sizes uh between psychodynamic
psychotherapies and things like CBT and
say things like act and whatever
else um over a certain span of time but
then what you see is that for the
psychodynamic and psychoanalytic
therapies that effect size continues to
increase over time even after therapy
stops um and so you end up seeing like
crazy effect sizes over over a certain
longitudinal period of time that are
like 1.5 or whatever which is just it's
a crazy strong effect and one of the
reasons that are kind of hypothesized
for that is because in psychodynamics
and analytic therapies you're not just
treating symptoms right you're sitting
with someone over a period of time and
actually they're kind of internalizing a
new way of thinking and a new way of
relating not just to themselves but to
other people as well and that that new
way uh that new capacity continues to
serve them over time and so even after
treatment ends there're still making
gains whereas you know if you just uh
did did a more circumscribed treatment
for more circumscribed issue um they
might show gains while treatment is
happening but then there's a tendency uh
for them to lose those gains over time
after treatment stops anyway um I've
I've got a I've got a whole presentation
that I give to University students on
this um in Psychology courses um and
maybe someday I'll put that up online
and you can see the uh see the research
I'm talking about but anyway thank you
so much for the question
okay Noel says how common is the
comorbidity of NPD and BPD and how does
it manifest in comparison to just NP NPD
or just BPD um I think they're often uh
coor and um in fact when I think about
the the uh collapse of the grandios
defenses in NPD um into a vulnerable
experience um I often times I feel like
that looks very very much like BPD um
and the only reason I wouldn't call it
BPD necessarily is because there's a
fluctuation between that kind of
vulnerable uh fragmenting uh borderline
kind of experience uh and the more um
defended constituted grandiose
experience um and that's something that
uh people with BPD don't necessarily
have right they don't necessarily have
that kind of grandiose false self um
presentation that hides the underlying
distress and
fragmentation um so but you know one way
to think about this is um in terms of
borderline personality organization
which is different than borderline
personality disorder uh this is a
psychoanalytic concept um but I find it
just tremendously useful um and so if
you think about this in terms of like a
developmental progress over time right
um very very early in life we would have
something called a psychotic personality
organization it's called psychotic uh
because the person is struck is like the
main developmental task is just like
dealing with reality right and not
distorting reality uh every time there's
distress uh and so once you kind of got
that down and you're like okay reality
is reality and I can tolerate that
reality doesn't always conform to my
wishes and that it's frustrating
sometimes once once you have that
defensive structure in place then you
kind of graduate to the next task which
is to separate the concepts of self and
other right so what's me versus what's
you what when something is happening
inside of me is it because of of what
you did right or is it because of what
what I'm feeling or right do my thoughts
influence you do your thoughts influence
me Etc and that might seem kind
of like the way I just described it it
might sound kind of silly or rudimentary
or something but that's actually what
people with a borderline personality
organization struggle with right uh
where where does the distress live is it
in you or is it in me do I feel
distressed because of something you did
or something you thought or because I'm
distressed did you intend for me to to
feel that way does that make you bad if
I feel bad are you right so there's this
confusion about what is self and what is
not self um and oftentimes with people
with BPD um you know one of one of the
reasons why BP PD is called borderline
personality disorder is because it has
many of the Hallmarks of borderline
personality organization it's kind of
like uh the poster child of Personality
borderline personality organization um
the struggle in BPD between what is self
and what is other uh is just takes
Center the the is of central importance
um the person you know really has
trouble with boundaries a lot of the
time uh they tend to you
know um attach like um really intensely
uh but then there can be a feeling of
being kind of invaded by the other
person and they don't like that and so
then they push the person Away really
really strong like really hard um and
and you know and then but then when they
do that then they feel abandoned um and
so then they pull back and then they
push and they pull and they push and
they pull and that's kind of the dynamic
in BPD um and there can be a lot of
self-hatred uh that that goes along with
that process as well and a lot of um
like pain and distress that just can't
be located and kind of can't be
articulated and so um that can express
itself in the form of self harm and uh
and stuff like that as well
um that is a very similar experience to
what is happening in a in a vulnerable
phase or a collapse uh in NPD there's
the same kind of boundary confusion
often there's the same kind of really
intense attachment anxiety uh there's
the same kind of self-hatred uh that
that can happen um the same kind of
emotional disconstraint uh that you know
you see in BPD as well and and the
reason for that isn't necessarily
because they're like comorbid disorders
it's because there's a borderline
personality organization and that's what
borderline personality organization
looks like
um in NPD then there is this kind of uh
like
um kind of almost like a splinter skill
or something like this this part of the
person that has been
um kind of created uh to um sort of
pretend right to give the impression of
um not being in that kind of distress
and we would call that the false
um and and that that kind of aspect of
the personality that false self aspect
tends to um kind of kind of even even if
there there's a borderline personality
organization it tends to kind of pop up
and and live uh in a slightly higher
uh uh Stratus in terms of functioning uh
and and not because
um am I'm trying to say here um it's
like it's it's it's almost like a suit
of armor or something or you know that
that the person can kind of like they've
they've had to adapt in this way they
can pull themselves together in this one
kind of specific way uh and and appear
both to themselves and other people like
they're self-sufficient and they're
they're good to go you know uh they got
this um and and that's that's what we
call the false self um so I I hope that
helps um also made a video on this you
can find it on my channel I think it's
called is it vulnerable narcissism or
BPD um and it and it goes into these um
these Dynamics in a little bit more
detail but I guess that you know that
the short answer would be um yes I I
feel like BPD and NPD are very close and
there's overlap in in a number of ways
um and um there tends to be a little bit
of a difference in terms of the core
conflict that the personality like
defensive personality structure is
organized around um for NPD it has to do
with um the viability of self and
self-esteem and for BPD it has to do
with um like attachment anxiety and and
and feeling um some intense ambivalence
about um how close versus how far others
are from the self okay thanks for the
question oh my goodness uh this
this is a big question here uh Norman
says what general advice would I give a
room of people with NPD that are open to
the idea of making some prescribed
Lifestyle Changes um I guess that
the so
um it would have to do
with sort of embracing
vulnerability um
and and it would have have to do with
sort of a a kind of a a radical
self-acceptance
um accepting who you are exactly as you
are in this moment that doesn't mean
that that like oh everything's great you
don't have to do that's not that that's
that's not necessarily what I'm talking
about I'm talking about just accepting
the reality that you are as you are you
are who you are um
and and and and trying to find a way
that that can be okay um a a metaphor
that I use sometimes um with patients is
that you know imagine a tree right and
it's growing and it's it starts having
to grow around obstacles right maybe
there's a maybe there's another tree and
its branches are in the way or maybe
there's a you know whatever there's a
house or there's a you know has to grow
around these obstacles right because
it's it's it's trying to get to the
light and and there are things that are
in the way uh and so so the tree takes
uh a shape as a result of having to make
those
adaptations um and and that's the shape
of the tree right uh it wouldn't be that
tree if it didn't have that shape uh and
and the story of this tree is actually a
story of adaptation and it's a story of
of resilience um and and it's a story of
making the best with what you had
available um and I think any of us would
go outside and we could see a tree and
no matter how like twisted around that
tree was or how unusual the shape of
that tree we could see Beauty in in in
that tree right um and and I feel like
this is the story for all living things
um and yourself included um and so if
you can find a way to sort of connect
with yourself
compassionately to see yourself in the
current state that you're in whatever
state that is uh in the way in the same
way that you might see that tree right
um if you can find the sort of the sort
of beauty there um I think that that's
that's you know
80% of of the struggle because for
people with path ological narcissism and
NPD you know there's so much like no I
have to be perfect no it has to be this
way right um and there's so much
pressure that that they end up putting
on themselves whether or not they
realize it um and and this this constant
scrutiny of self and this constant
comparison of self to others and this
constant sort of you know objectifying
of your own being in this way um it it
ends up causing you to feel like you're
not you're not in life you're not um
I've heard people describe it as like
not being a member of the human race in
some essential way right um I've heard
it described as like you know peering in
uh through the window from like a cold
you know being out in the cold and
looking in on like a a family like you
know having dinner or sitting around the
fire like there's just this way of
feeling outside the experience of being
human in some essential way and um and I
think that that has to do with this this
idea that you need to the the form of
you the shape of you needs to be a
certain right needs to fit a certain
preconceived ideal um and that's just
not how living things work it's not how
anything works it's not how you work um
and so beginning to understand that that
idea is a response actually to to
pressure that you felt from your
caregivers when you were young to you
know um the feeling of of not being
accepted or not being seen or not being
embraced or not being liked uh in some
in some way and so then you decided okay
well I'm gonna I'm gonna you know make
myself a different shape right so that I
can be liked and I can be good enough
and I can get these things these
essentially human experiences that I
seek um you know that's
there's nothing aberant about that
that's that's what I think anyone would
do given those conditions and so maybe
it's what you did and um but being able
to kind of see that for what it is it
was helpful then right it helped you
survive but now it's it's not it's not
helping you anymore it's just causing
you to feel like that person out in the
street looking in through the window
longing to be a part of of the the
community of people the community of
real people right that's another way
that I've heard it described um so allow
yourself to be real um and and that
means you know you are as you are um it
doesn't mean that you can't then take
further steps toward you know healing or
toward actualizing in in a you know a
way that feels good to you Etc but but
all of that work all of that progress
has to start uh from a place of
acceptance um and it can't be about like
I'm going to twist this thing until it
has the right shape it h it has to come
from a place of no this is I am as I am
and now I'm G to try to grow now I'm G
to try to heal um and so that I guess
that would be my my advice um and uh and
the other the other piece of that is
that you know that work is best
accomplished in the context of a
relationship with someone else who who
can give you help you to have have the
experience of being seen and accepted um
and uh and and so that you can begin to
see and accept um and that that's best
accomplished I think in a therapy uh
relationship with somebody who's who's
um able to give you that give you that
experience so thanks for the
question ah okay uh Mal adaptive
daydreaming uh this has come up before
and I don't think I've ever addressed it
yeah okay
um oh and then he goes on uh to say
please please give me guidance okay so
two two different things
um so how do we make sense of this um
Mal adaptive daydreaming stuff
um well I guess I would think of that in
terms of like uh in terms of well two
things one would be like a kind of wish
fulfillment in fantasy um and the other
one would be um a kind of uh avoidance
right and so um anytime somebody's kind
of veering off uh in a substantial
way in the direction of fantasy um I I
start to think about you know okay well
what is it about
life uh that's that you can't you can't
deal with you can't tolerate
right what you know so I I would be if I
were working with with you in therapy I
I would be really curious about the
themes of the Daydream right um so you
say it's of social acceptance and and
respect um it's you
know it seems like that like that
there's something about that um that is
I would imagine in your life um you're
not feeling accepted right you're not
feeling respected um so I I would want
to be having some conversations with you
about well what is respect to you right
what is acceptance um to you and um and
and what is it about what you're getting
uh or not getting um in your life right
like how does it measure up to the
fantasy or not measure up to the fantasy
um as far as like what what you can uh
start to do about this
um gosh you know it
it's it's really difficult to to say um
just you know based on just this like
one little snippet um my you know I I
would say as best you can um I would try
you know if it's up to 10 hours of your
day um then I would I would be wondering
with you about well what is it that
you're like what is it about your your
schedule that is allowing you to engage
in this kind of fantasy right for for so
so many hours of the day and and I would
I would actually be talking with you a
little bit about distraction right about
like okay well uh what how can we fill
up your time right so that there's more
engagement like you're kind of you kind
of have to engage more uh with with the
real world with other people um there's
something about having too much space uh
where you know you that that's allowing
you to kind of ruminate and to kind of
engage in what are probably kind of
obsessional uh fantasies at this point
um and and the more time you spend there
the less you it's kind of like a
Insidious cycle the more time you spend
there the less um able you feel to sort
of contend with you know the quote Real
World um and uh and so I would be trying
to figure out ways that you can spend
less time there and more time in the
real World um and and looking at at
adjustments you can make to your
schedule that that kind of enforce that
right um so you know maybe it means
looking at a at a different job or maybe
it means um you know like whatever it
means like I I don't know anything about
your life but just be thinking along
those lines uh that that's where I would
probably start as far as like a concrete
intervention
goes all right um
what's the difference between the
mastermind1 says what's the difference
between empathy sympathy and compassion
I see a lot of people using these words
interchangeably and if you don't have
much of one does that mean you don't
have less in all three so
um okay so empathy versus sympathy um
and now this look this is going to be my
take on this right I'm you know I'm not
Websters right so I don't or Miram
Webster or whatever it's called now but
I so this is my take on it um uh empathy
is feeling something as though it were
you like feeling what's happening to
somebody else as though it were
happening to you right so being able to
kind of Step into the shoes of somebody
else and
imagine what must this be like for them
that's empathy to my mind and and I
think cohut has a similar um Hines cohut
has a similar
definition um sympathy is feeling for
someone right so gosh I feel sorry for
him or her right I feel sorry for that
person that they're struggling in the
way that they're struggling and that
would be more of a sympathy uh and then
compassion um I guess is is sort of like
I imagine it sort of like sympathy um
but but there's a little bit more kind
of like
love involved right sort of
like
um it's not it's not just feeling sorry
for it's sort of like and I care about
you right and I and I really
care that that you're that that you're
experiencing this um so that that would
be how it comes up for me at least um I
don't know if it you know if you have
less of one does it mean you have less
of all three honestly I think that
there's kind of too much in some ways
there's kind of like too much emphasis
placed on like uh you know deficits or
lacks in empathy in NPD um it's like all
anybody talks about and I feel like they
kind of Miss like the
fundamental like piece aspects of the
actual disorder I yeah sometimes they
express themselves in impaired empathy
but even when that happens I feel like
what you're really seeing there is um
attachment avoidance which we talked
about before uh and um and and just just
a preoccupation right so when you're
preoccupied with something like you know
propping up a fragmenting experience of
self um you you just don't have a lot of
resources there to to have empathy for
other people you're you're you're
preoccupied right and so this there's a
kind of egocentrism that goes along with
that uh you know where it's just like
you know if I'm I I've said this in
another video if I'm starving all I
think about is food if I'm if I'm dying
of thirst all I think about is water if
I'm drowning all I think about is
getting that next breath of air uh I
don't have a lot of capacity to
empathize with other people in that
state and and uh NPD is a kind of
drowning it's a kind of starving there's
a there there's a way that the person is
so desperately trying to hold together
an a a viable experience of self um that
they just don't they just can't see
other people in that state necessarily
um but you know I do think that uh it's
the case that when when there when the
level of distress goes down uh for most
people with NPD um the uh capacity for
empathy goes up and um and and people
you know a lot of the commenters on my
channel they'll they'll observe that
phenomen on but they kind of draw a
different conclusion from it they say
well you know when he's out at the store
he's like Mr you know he's great you
know he's nice to everybody but then
when he comes home you know he's abusive
to
me um and I would say well that's
because the level
of distress or affect or whatever is
lower when you're out at the
store uh the stakes are lower um versus
is when you're at home and you're
dealing with a relationship that's
probably problematic in a number of
different ways uh and all of the um
stress uh and um pressure that somebody
with uh NPD can feel in uh the context
of a um of a close interpersonal
relationship um or an interpersonal
relationship where the other person is
trying to get close to them um there's
just there's all kinds of stuff that
comes up there and and the
disregulation that that goes along with
this disorder sometimes will tend to
show up in the context of that situation
much more readily than it will in a low
stake situation like you know going to
the store or something like that um so
you know I I really see this you know in
a way um as you
know where's the energy going right um
and uh and for people with NP that
energy is consumed by uh the um the sort
of central deficits itself um and their
attempts to manage that issue uh and so
they just they just don't they don't
tend to see other other people when
that's
happening uh so there you go okay thanks
for the
question all right uh this is kind of on
the same them theme as before uh do I
agree that with kernberg that narcissism
is a defense against borderline
disorder not necessarily um yeah I don't
I wouldn't say that it's a defense
against like borderline issues um you
know really what kernberg uh is his kind
of conceptualization as I understand it
um is that very early in the formation
of the
self or the kind of self structure um
there is there's just too much
frustration uh the the the baby
essentially um is trying to get its
needs met um and you know and not just
like needs in terms of like food and
stuff shelter but but like emotional
needs met and the caregiver is not
meeting those needs for whatever reason
or they're meeting them in a way that is
just causing the infant to just be
flooded with toxic primitive uh
aggression and frustration and so
there's a little they start to the
psyche starts to make like a little
tweak um to to try to circumvent that
flooding of primitive uh aggression and
frustration uh and and what it does is
it it begins to merge with its own ego
ideal the ego begins to merge with its
own ego ideal uh in order to
shortcircuit dependency on frustrating
caregivers uh and that's in K in
kernberg's formulation that's where that
that kind of grandiose
self-sufficient uh presentation comes
from uh and in his mind the center of
that is aggression um and and he calls
it it's called primitive aggression
because it it belongs to a very uh early
developmental stage um and um so that's
not really a defense against a a
borderline you know disorder or
experience that's a defense against
dependency um and because dependency is
experienced as too frustrating um so
that's that's my understanding of of
kernberg's idea there
um I would say that to the extent that
the uh sort of Personality organization
in NPD is at the borderline level then
the uh the kind of false self
grandiosity uh is is an attempt to not
experience that distress not not
experience the fragment the
fragmenting uh self-
States excuse
me that that sort of live in a
borderline uh personality organization
and so there's like this kind of island
of like order right uh in in NPD and
that that would be the false self uh
sort of compensatory
grandiose Island right and then when
that um gets flooded you know or it
falls apart or collapses however however
you want to do the metaphor then uh
there there can be an experience of the
underlying borderline uh States and
conflicts so that might be uh what what
you're referring to and if that's the
case then I I would tend to agree thanks
for the question and just one second I
just have to cough real quick
excuse me a frog in my
throat
um Molly
ringworm uh asks is it true that
borderline level pathological narcs I
don't I don't really like the term narc
uh I feel like that's a bit dehumanizing
but
um uh don't experience positive emotion
no that's not true um it's uh
there's positive emotion experienced um
it's really it has to do with an
instability in the um in the the
experience of self uh and so um often
times uh when a person is in a
vulnerable state they are overwhelmed by
their their by what we call introjective
preoccupations and these are just
preoccupations about the the goodness or
viability or effectiveness of self
uh they just feel like they're just
they're just drowning in in often
negative affect things like shame
humiliation rage Envy um you know stuff
like that um a and and so to to the
extent that that is filling up the
screen then yeah they're probably not
experiencing a lot of positive emotions
uh there there's a tendency toward
depression uh in in those States and
also uh unfortunately things like
suicidality tend to happen uh in those
States as well um but it's it's not that
they can't experience positive emotion
in those States it's just that that they
tend to be preoccupied by the distress
that in other states like grandio States
uh they're not necessarily tuning into
right so in the grandios um states that
the distress is put away somewhere else
uh and so there's there's more room to
have positive emotions in those States
uh but but it's not like there some like
they can't uh experience positive
emotion
um let's
see all
right so some of these questions I feel
like I've already kind of glanced uh on
or addressed a little bit so I'm I'm not
answering every question here um
so I'm curious about this one Mark uh do
I believe in switching therapists when
it comes to Healing both for NPD and the
Survivor so I'm I'm wondering uh what do
you
mean
um like if the therapy is ineffective
you mean or if the person doesn't
understand seem to understand
NPD in that case yeah then I I I might
might think about switching to somebody
who feels like a better fit
um let me know if that's if that's not
what the question is but uh
that's there's my
answer
um gosh what else
okay Rufus
demand uh his friend is going through
some stuff but he watches my channel can
I do a shout out for Cosmo sure shout
out to Cosmo um and glad you're here uh
supporting him um give him some some
advice about dealing with
self-sacrificial
Tendencies
um I think it can be hard sometimes for
for people and this is kind of like a
little bit of like an oxymoron in some
ways because people would imagine well
of course course someone with NPD or
narcissism you know they feel entitled
to everything right um but that's not
necessarily the case in fact the
entitlement that is expressed um it
tends to have a kind of a foundation in
in like severe um and profound
ambivalence and doubt about being
entitled to anything at all and that's
in fact where the the kind of toxic
shame that goes along with narcissism
comes from right um and so you know I
feel like um just there's often uh you
know some some issues around like
feeling that you actually
deserve things like you actually deserve
to be cared about as you are right this
something I was talking about earlier
when it comes to to self-acceptance like
and the idea like I've talked to so many
people uh who you know they say
something like well I just you know I
like I don't I have no idea why my wife
loves me or my spouse cares about me or
presume presumably cares about me right
what what is it about me that they could
possibly love or care about and and I
feel like that is just so like just like
a direct line from that idea like all I
see when I hear that is like that just
this little just this little kiddo you
know just not getting not having the
experience not being shown that they're
worth loving um and it's just H just
like breaks my heart to think about that
um um and and so I think there can often
be some conflict around like deserving
things um and uh and I guess my you know
my advice there would be for Cosmo
to um ask himself or herself or their
themselves I I don't know what gender
Cosmo identifies as but uh oh you you
said him okay ask himself
um uh what that's about you know like
does he not feel that he actually
deserves things is there conflict around
that and if so um to to to be curious
about that you know to begin to notice
what what contexts does this
self-sacrifice occur in what does it
cost him you know but also what's the
secondary gain as well you know there's
always there's always a duality right
there's always a a cost and a and a
benefit uh to any coping strategy
anything that somebody's does is a cost
and there's a benefit so begin to ask
himself about that and begin to feel
curious about that and notice just kind
of like the patterns that are involved
um and that's that's a good first first
couple of steps uh for something like
that so thank
you all right uh
let's see uh I'm not sure that I
understand this but I might just be
reading it wrong when I was talking
about the empathic approach to Healing
people with NPD or narcissistic traits
can I give a general concrete example of
what immersing
them what may I'm not ah whoa I'm just
I'm just or who yeah I just I'm sorry I
don't
I don't understand the question um if
you can maybe uh try to rephrase that
and and put it in the chat um I might be
able to to
respond um see uh Lisa Taylor Austin
says hi Dr Eaton hi Lisa uh for anybody
who doesn't know I did an interview with
uh with Lisa on her Channel um and I
highly recommend you go check it out and
go check out her Channel as well uh
she's got some good stuff on there uh so
thank thanks for thanks for showing uh
thanks for showing up and thanks for
saying hi it's good to see
you ah here we go okay immersing them in
that empathy they didn't get from their
caregiver okay
um yeah so uh I I just I feel like
that's just a basic that's just a basic
stance right um and and you would be
doing that in any kind of in any good
therapist would be responding
empathically to their patients right the
difference uh with NPD is that the NPD
presentation unless it's fragmenting and
vulnerable um is often there's like this
defensive
self-sufficiency and uh and so it can be
so difficult to get through that to
actually see the the vulnerable uh parts
of them uh that are that are inside um
in addition to that uh there's often a
kind of a reactivity that the person
will have uh where they will respond to
your attempts to get close in a kind of
a distancing way or in a defensive way
and that can be uh somewhat off-putting
especially to a therapist you know who's
who's like whoa okay hey buddy if you
don't want me to help then I you know
like there can be like this kind of
defensive way that the therapist can
respond too to that and so um somebody
with NPD who's who's having those issues
they go through therapy after therapy
after therapy either feeling totally not
seen by the therapist or feeling uh in
some ways like punished or criticized or
attacked by the therapist uh and so one
of the reasons why MPD is difficult to
treat is because the Dynamics can be so
provocative and so um you know it can be
such a roller coaster ride for for both
parties but for the therapist in
particular because they're they keep
trying the job is to keep trying to get
close to a part part of the person that
is surrounded by um by shame and by uh
sensitivity you know to like hyp
sensitivity to feeling attacked or
criticized um and and sometimes rage um
and and it's protected by this sort of
gr like grandiose self image uh that may
or may not be grounded in any kind of
reality and so uh it can it's it's very
challenging to find way ways to connect
to the the authenticity of the person
when you're kind of fielding all all of
this other stuff that's there to protect
the person right it's there to protect
the person uh both from
um re rra being ret traumatized uh but
it's also there to protect them from
their own um internal
instability uh in terms of self-esteem
and so um you know I
think the empathy often just has to do
with like just just trying always to
stay close to what you imagine uh the
kind of the the central vulnerabilities
to be always tring trying to stay close
like in my mind I'm always trying to
stay close to like the little the little
kiddo in there right and just trying to
listen to what that kiddo has to say
trying to listen for that kiddo's
experience their fears their longings uh
their their anger their hurt um and and
looking for the ways that that is is
being expressed uh indirectly or in a
disguised way or sometimes in a in a
totally inverted way um based on on the
kind of configuration there um so I I
don't know if that's concrete enough for
you but that's that's kind of as as good
an example as I can kind of give just
right off the top of my head thanks for
the
question let's see
uh max power wants to know what do I get
out of
this and is it personally fulfilling
yeah
um I
mean I didn't
nobody like made me nobody made me
specialize in this you know um I I I
specialized in this because it it the
these these issues I see them as
um fundamentally human uh and um and
there's a there's a a kind of a
tragedy that speaks to me um and
uh and because um it just makes sense to
me um and so um yeah I find it I find it
personally fulfilling um both to think
about these things to write about them
to produce uh content for public
consumption about it um and then also to
teach about it and then uh most of all
to to treat uh this this population and
their loved ones um and partly it's it's
if I'm being honest it's because I so
frequently have the experience of some
coming in and doing you know a few
sessions or sometimes less than one
session before they're like you know oh
my God like nobody's
ever I've never had anybody get it
before you know uh and that and
something about that uh the experience
of knowing that somebody feels found
that they feel discovered maybe for the
first time in a meaningful way in their
entire life that that's a that to me
that's a
um that's a a special thing to be a part
of and so um yeah you know um thanks for
the
question all
right yeah so DH the problem is that we
narcissists tend to look at empathic
people as weak or marks that we can
easily manipulate or use yeah in a in a
grandiose State that's
how I would imagine that would show up
um but uh that
that's to my mind also based in a
fundamental denial of the dependency
longings that uh lie underneath that
grandiose
defense um and it can be very difficult
to let
somebody close enough to actually have
an impact on you um and that can also be
a terrifying experience as well um and
uh and so the defenses get get rallied
and you know um it becomes about you
know not your weakness or your need but
the other person's weakness and their
need um and
um you know that's that's just kind of
how that defensive structure works uh in
my
experience so I get it yeah it's hard um
and and I I often have the experience of
like trying to connect to that sort of
the the needful part of a patient and
them and and I see it too many times to
count like just the person being like no
like that's not that's not me right I
hate pity I hate people feeling
sorry for me you know right and and and
and and I you know sometimes I try to
move too F too quickly in that direction
and I have to take a step back and be
like okay you know like I I I hear you
right that felt that felt like too much
or it felt too close or that didn't feel
so good so
we'll we'll try we'll try again another
time you know um so uh but that yeah
those Dynamics are very present uh in in
in NPD so thank you for articulating
that piece of it
ah tan have I considered bias in working
with narcissists who want to heal how do
I empathize with the sufferers of
narcissism while staying empathic toward
narcissists uh yeah I mean that sure
there's a self- selection bias here
right you know both on my part uh you
know as the the clinician
who is drawn to this work and then also
on the part of the patient who
yeah who says who is capable or able to
take a look at themselves and say yeah I
want to I want to make a change here um
and and self- selects for therapy uh
absolutely yeah um but you know uh that
being said um I also consume the
research right I mean I I read a lot of
research about NPD and a lot of
literature about
NPD uh and it all it's all what I'm
saying it's some variant on what I'm
saying here um
you don't it doesn't seem that way to
folks who aren't in the field because
they're watching you know the rest of
the stuff on YouTube and so much of that
is just is just not helpful and they're
reading articles online that are you
know like
you that are pathologizing or
stigmatizing or
whatever and kind of buying into this
construct of NPD with where it's about
lack of empathy and abuse uh and that's
it those two things those are the
defining characteristics of NPD and it's
not that's not those are not the
defining characteristics of
NPD finding characteristics of MPD are
uh fundamental uh instability of self uh
that takes the form of core conflicts
around
self-esteem um essentially like I said
last time it's
unstable
unrealistic um and uh and and and so you
know so a core issue right and then
there are maladaptive coping strategies
that are developed very early in life to
help manage that core
vulnerability that's NPD um sometimes it
can take the form of abusive treatment
of other people uh it by the way uh it
also takes the form of abusive treatment
of the self as well there's a reason why
NPD is significantly correlated with
suicide
um this is an at risk population
objectively speaking um and so you
know um is there bias in terms of the
population I work with yes uh I will
admit that but uh go go read the
literature yourself like act actual you
know uh peer reviewed literature on NPD
uh and and and see what see what you
find um and I guarantee it's not going
to be the boogeyman that YouTube has uh
you know wants you to believe it is so
thanks let's
see uh by the way I'm going to go to
3:30 my time so it's um half past the
hour whatever time it is for you
uh here's a good question also by tan
you're asking some good questions today
thank you for these um do you think at
any point in their lives narcissists
choose to become narcissists perhaps by
giving up on themselves in a way or do
you think even high self-awareness would
not be enough uh I just I just you know
I don't
know I don't know if I believe in Free
Will at the end of the day so that that
might be a little bit of a a little bit
of a ring wrinkle uh in in the in the
equation here
um but let's set that philosophical
issue aside for a second and just think
about what it would mean for somebody to
choose to become a narcissist right
um in my
experience uh what folks who have these
issues want desperately
is to feel
understood and to feel seen in a
way that that that helps them to make a
kind of
compassionate uh sense of their internal
experience
um one that isn't kind of being
swallowed continuously by a kind of
Shame
uh or a kind of
uh like mix of envy and
rage
um they just they just want to be loved
I mean really like that's at at its base
right um and it that that takes all
kinds of squirely you know directions
developmentally um but that that is that
that's what it is at its base in my
experience
since the kind of net result of
narcissism is is actually one where you
feel that it is impossible to be
loved because nobody can actually see
what's re who you really are on the
inside all they see is what you put out
there right I mean that's the kind of
curse of the false self-defense is that
it gets so good at being the false self
that it convinces everybody sometimes
the narcissist included that that that's
the real person that's the whole person
so that that's such a profound obstacle
to the feeling of actually being cared
about um that I know I don't think
anybody ever chooses that or would
choose that knowingly
um I also don't think that it's a choice
in so far as these issues go far enough
back that they have their roots in
preverbal experience so that's before
they were even there was even a concept
of self and other um really I mean like
a one that's presented represented right
in the
mind these experiences go back to the
first year of Life uh and and the self
structure that's built from those
experience from those experiences and
the personality structure that's built
out of those experiences you know we're
talking like first four maybe five years
of life here uh and this this is not
something that children can choose uh no
no no aspect of this is is the product
of conscious choice in my opinion um I
think that people they end up in
adolescence and they begin to have these
experiences then that are kind of
characteristic of
narcissism and and some of sometimes
they begin to wonder well what is it
about me what is it about relationships
that I keep having these kinds of exper
experiences some of them don't some some
don't have that level of insight and and
just persist in the kind of uh
grandiosity you know the inflation
collapse inflation collapse inflation
collapse and that's just they go through
life that way um but I don't think that
it's ever a a product of a like a
conscious
Choice thanks for the
question what
else how can NPD trigger hypo IC
episodes uh
yeah
so
um there's different ways to think about
this um the way that cohut and others
conceptualize this is in the form of
horizontal and vertical splits in the
personality the um the vertical split is
between the grandios and the symptomatic
experience of self right the grandiose
and the vulnerable experience of self
the horizontal Al split is having to do
with uh the um all of the kind of Life
Energy of the S the libidinal energy of
of the
psyche is accessible to the grandios
side of the split whereas the vulnerable
side is cut off from that
um this is all like psychoanalytic stuff
um so when somebody is in a vulnerable
or a symptomatic State there is a
depressive kind of phenomenon where they
just don't have access in some ways to
that the creative vital energy uh that
they do have access to when they're on
the grandio side of the
split maybe that's true maybe it's not I
don't know that's just one that's one
way of conceptualizing
it I think what ends up happening um if
we take all the theory out really
is that um when somebody is in a
grandiose uh phase of this
disorder um they feel like possibilities
are endless right I mean there's a
reason why uh in bipolar disorder Mania
is often accompanied by grandiosity
right um it's because those two kind of
go hand inand right when you're euic
when you're you know when you're just
like man everything is good and I'm good
and I can do what whatever I want and
this is great I'm just like I'm
just filled with potential right I mean
that that that's going to be like that
state of mind will itself but get a kind
of hypom mania right because you just
feel like well everything's possible
I'm gonna go do it right uh and and
that that can kind of feed on itself uh
and sometimes turn into yeah like an
actual hypomanic episode especially if
there's already perhaps some kind of a
biological uh you know predisposition to
something like a bipolar 2 disorder or
cyclothymic you know something or other
right um so uh whereas when the person
is in a collapsed or vulnerable state
all of that possibility is foreclosed on
right it's just like no none of it's
possible none of it's acceptable or
accessible the self that I was the self
that could do all of those things is
lost it's gone and I can't get back
there and and and that begins to trigger
a depressive uh experience a depressive
episode uh so that's that's really I
think what happens that's what I see
happening in my practice with with folks
um I see plenty of folks who have I
think erroneously been diagnosed with
some kind of bipolar disorder I know
Otto kernberg talks about that as well
uh that he feels a lot of um bipolar
diagnosis you know might actually be
something more like
um you know personality uh disorders and
splitting basically um including NPD so
I hear plenty of folks with NPD talk
about you know this experience of self
where they're like they like you know
they're the life of the party they're
you know just they just feel like
there's just endless potential uh and
and they just
feel
uh like just you know Peak like
self-experience um and and and the the
that can sort of happen in kind of such
like a distilled or kind of pure form
because of the uh splitting right and so
all of the bad is split off and it's
kept on the other side of that kind of
vertical split right uh and so when
they're in the grandiose State uh for
some people it is just it's like just
mainlining good feelings you know um and
uh and and there's none of the bad to to
to muddy the water there um so thanks
for the
question um what else
these are some good uh some good
questions today everybody thank you for
them
um Norman uh wants to know if overc
consumption of marijuana can lead to the
development of NPD no uh that is I do
not believe that's how it works uh like
I said these issues uh they tend to be
rooted in very early velopmental trauma
relational trauma
um now you know so so that's kind of the
core that's kind of the foundation right
and then you know over time like when
the person becomes an adult or whatever
yeah I mean there can be different
things that can kind of precipitate
experiences of expansiveness or
experiences of collapse right um and you
know drug use can certainly be one of
them right um or and or the the kinds of
internal states that are precipitated by
you know drug use you know um for for
good or ill right
um
so yeah um but I I don't think that um
that marijuana use itself could cause
NPD uh that's I don't think that's a
possibility thank you for the question
yeah so Teton uh about you know the kind
of direction that like the ICD is going
um where looking at personality disorder
as kind of a
a not a car categorical
uh thing but more of like a Continuum or
a
spectrum um or yeah I I I think that's
valid um the my version of that that I
tend to to use it's not my version the
version of that that I tend to use is um
like I said that that kind of Continuum
that developmental Continuum from
psychotic through borderline and
neurotic up toward healthy personality
organization
so um you know with like anytime
somebody has a personality disorder
they're either at the borderline level
of Personality organization or The
Psychotic level
um
and there is some categorical piece
there that has to do with the kind of
central uh deficits or the the core
conflicts and characteristic uh
defensive adaptations that develop
around the those core conflicts and I do
think that those can validly be uh
separated out into dis kind of like
discreet you know personality Styles but
but I think there's always some overlap
there's always some bleeding
into uh you know from one to the other
uh and and the main thing to be thinking
about there is the borderline
personality
organization uh or or psychotic
personality
organization um that that that is the
cause of all the trouble right because
somebody uh who has got a a narcissistic
personality
style but is like healthy right you know
kind of at that healthy in that healthy
level of of Personality organization um
they
um
um they aren't kind of dealing with the
same issues they're not dealing with the
splitting and the projecting and the
distorted reality and the kind of wildly
fluctuating experience of self and other
people uh the boundary confusion uh the
emotional disregulation uh and distress
tolerance issues like they're not
they're not having those problems
because those problems live in the
borderline and The Psychotic ranges of
Personality
organization uh so that's why I say in
some of my videos
right a person who has NPD they will
always have a narcissistic personality
style issues about self-worth and
self-esteem will always sit as Central
motivators in their behavior and their
psychology
but all of the other problematic things
that go along with NPD those are about a
narcissistic personality style organized
at the border at the borderline level
and if we can help the person to develop
past that borderline range and into a
more kind of neurotic and eventually
even healthy personality
organization then uh then they just
they're just they just a you know we all
have Central conflicts and things that
motivate us and things that we're afraid
of and whatever else I mean that's what
it is to be a person um the problem is
when those core conflicts are surrounded
by a defensive organization that causes
the person to distort reality to blur
the boundary between self and other and
uh and when it causes a kind of
continual disruption uh in the
continuity of internal experience and by
that I mean splitting right uh where one
part of the self can't communicate to
another part of the self uh and
experiences become siloed uh and um and
and that that that leads to extreme
sometimes discontinuity between
different self States
okay uh is there a way to learn empathy
um
yeah um yeah uh that's you learn by by
receiving it really I mean that's that's
where it comes from That's How any of us
learn
empathy uh so um you
know to be empathized
with uh over time you begin to
internalize that experience and it
becomes a capacity that you now have not
just to empathize with yourself and
understand your own self- States but
also via that insight to understand the
self states of other people um so you
know we can't give what we haven't got
right and so uh if if there's kind of no
self or if the self is in pieces and
those pieces exist in these siloed you
know kind of parts of of of the
personality and we can't get from one to
the other and they don't communicate
well and whatever else it's going to be
very difficult then
to uh empathize with other people not
just because as I said before the
preoccupations that come from having
this kind of continually fragmenting
unstable experience of self but also
because when somebody is kind of in this
siloed experience over here right it's
going to be very difficult for them to
conceptualize the self- state of
somebody who's experiencing something
that's not inside that that kind of
siloed experience of self um until they
flip to another Silo that does
correspond and then they're like oh yeah
no I get that right but that can be
crazy making to the people around them
too
yeah so Colin from Glasgow is asking me
about genetics um so you know the jury's
out about that and not not whether or
not genetics is a part of it because of
course genetics are a part but to what
extent uh like how big of a part do they
play uh the studies that I've seen um
and this is just me kind of you know
pulling pulling out this out of my
memory right so uh but it's around 25%
um and that's a pretty big that's a
pretty big proportion um the the way
that I think about this is uh we're all
we all come into the world with a
certain kind of uh temperament right a
certain characteristic way of responding
to stimulus right um perhaps we're
hypers sensitive perhaps we're not
perhaps we are easy to soothe or
difficult to soothe as babies perhaps
we're kind of you know there all kinds
of different ways that we could kind of
just be come into the world with kind of
this neurological apparatus that's
primed based on our genetics to
synthesize experience in a certain way
um and then exper you know and and then
like the world starts happening to us
right well it's it's happening us to to
us in the womb as well but you know we
come out and we we behold the world in a
way uh so that kind of genetic
predisposition
is acted upon by the quality of
experience that we have especially in
those first few years of life when we're
building a basic
personality
um and so some children are going to be
predisposed to hypers sensitivity right
to all kinds of different experiences so
you know I think that this is a is a
valid critique uh that some folks have
of the kind of the
psychoanalytic uh models right uh is
that well it's too it blames the mother
too much or it blames the caregivers too
much and okay I hear that um it's not so
much that I'm saying yeah somebody did
this to you it's more like you came into
the world and you had this sort of
canvas right and the dimensions of the
canvas and the color of the canvas and
how well it absorbs paint and whatever
else that's all just those are qualities
of the canvas you came into the world
with it uh and then and then experience
begins to paint on this canvas
right there for children who happen to
be kind of exquisitly attuned right to
what seems to be going
on inside of other people right so Alice
Miller calls this the gifted child um
and they're paired with a caregiver
who's preoccupied for some reason maybe
because of their own narcissistic
preoccupation
or whatever and they just don't they're
just not available for the child in in
the way that the child needs them to be
available then I think that can begin to
get internalized in the form of this
kind of caretaking false self uh
construct excuse
me um and the same goes for any other
personality based issue right where it's
like you've got you've got the child and
they're genetic predispositions and then
you've got the goodness of fit that the
environment presents to that child and
if there's a good match then great it's
probably not going to be a big problem
but if it's a bad match uh then there's
going to be sometimes a tremendous
problem um so that's that's kind of how
I think about it um I tend to talk more
just about and focus more on like okay
there's trauma right and and what I mean
to say is not that like someone
traumatized you right and it's not like
that kind of a blaming sort of
conceptualization the trauma is the
result of the the bad match between what
your kind of canvas is and and what
experience was painting on it U and so
that's that's kind of how I
conceptualize it trauma nonetheless
right but it's not necessarily
somebody's fault
um all right I'm just gonna I'm going to
scan the rest of these questions real
quick just to see if there's anything
that I can I can get
to uh
quickly so this one here I just thank
you for this Robert um oh I just lost my
screen one sec
huh well okay uh everybody I I'm I'm I'm
Flying Blind now for whatever reason my
monitor just cut out and uh I know from
experience if I try to unplug it and
plug it back in I'm going to lose the
camera too so uh what I want to say is
thank you so much everyone for being
here uh I just so much appreciate uh
this this great community and the
community involvement and and all you
folks showing up and asking me such
great questions so thanks so much for
this this is something I'm going to try
to do I think on a monthly basis um and
uh keep bringing keep bringing great
great questions and comments and um uh
thanks again okay everybody take care
and uh I'll see you next time byeokay so it says that I'm live um and uh
happy to be here today uh it is Thursday
July
25th
2024 and uh just waiting
for folks to
uh to
come uh my name is Dr Mark Eaton uh I am
a licensed
psychologist and um I operate the heel
NPD YouTube channel as well as the heel
and PD
podcast all
right
yeah and uh okay yeah looks like some
folks are here um hi everyone welcome I
was just introducing myself uh my name
is Dr Mark Eaton uh licensed
psychologist in the states of California
and New York uh and uh I recently also
got a teleah Health registration in the
State of Florida so I can work there now
as well uh and I specialize in treating
writing thinking about uh and uh
publishing material about uh
pathological narcissism and NPD and also
related issues and disorders and I'm
here today to answer questions and also
talk uh all things NPD uh hello my halo
Within
welcome and uh hi christe welcome glad
to see
you and uh oh looks like uh cluster B
milkshake is here
hi all right yeah lots of folks welcome
glad to see everyone um yeah so I'm I'm
here to answer your questions so please
uh post any questions or comments or
discussion topics uh you'd like to hear
more about or learn more about
hi
ziv someone says uh hi doc great
content I don't uh I don't know the
ceric alphabet but uh hi thank you for
uh letting me know you find the content
helpful okay Artis Al line asks uh could
I speak a little bit about getting in
touch with uh your inner
child yeah um so uh gosh that's a great
question um I think uh that's a gradual
process it takes time um but you know
probably uh one of the best ways that
I've um found to go about doing that is
uh just to try to try to think about you
know try to locate I guess the the the
younger parts of you the the younger
perspectives that you might have um in
uh in in the issues that come up uh in
your relationships so in your
relationships with other people and then
also uh in your relationship with
yourself I think that a lot of times um
people have a tendency to overlook uh
the fact that you know we we have a
relationship with ourselves uh and we
tend uh to uh enact old relationship
patterns things that we've sort of taken
in uh from our early experiences lessons
that we've sort of derived from those
experiences we tend to enact those
patterns uh in our relationships with
other people and also our relationships
with ourselves uh I once read like a
kind of a a really helpful sort of
little quote about that uh and it went
something along the lines of you know uh
in all relationships we do one one or a
combination of the following three
things we treat um other people the way
that we were treated uh we find someone
who will treat us the way that we were
treated or we treat ourselves the way
that we were treated and I I find that
to be true in my work also just as a
human being on planet Earth um I find
that to be true within myself as well um
I think approaching uh your the your
thoughts and your feelings particularly
about yourself um gently is important um
try not to try not to Bear Down uh or
put a lot of pressure on yourself to be
any anything in particular to feel
anything in particular or not feel
something that you don't want to feel um
and and try to treat yourself the way
that you might treat uh a little kiddo
you know so you know ideally we don't
pressure kids
to you know look a certain way you know
feel a certain way want something in
particular you know ideally we sort of
allow those things to emerge
spontaneously and
authentically um as as the child you
know sort of discovers the world and
discovers themselves um and I think a
lot of us kind of maybe didn't didn't
have that to varying degrees uh when we
were young and uh and now is the time to
um to try to give that to yourself to
try to um develop that sort of
relationship with yourself and and when
you do that when you allow yourself to
to like the things that you like not
like the things you don't like feel the
way that you feel um need the things
that you need I think you are kind of by
default uh getting in touch with your
inner child in that way in a in a
productive way um so I I apologize if
that's a little bit of a garbled answer
um I find myself feeling unusually
anxious today uh about doing this live
stream I'm not sure why exactly um I
think you know what I think it is uh
partly because when I signed on uh
there's a little counter up here that
says who's here and it said nobody was
here and I suddenly I felt like uh uh oh
like what if nobody comes and what if
I'm just stuck here talking to my you
know monitor uh for the next hour or
whatever uh so anyway I had like a
little bit of a crisis I tried to
contain it um I'm so glad I'm so glad
people came I'm so relieved about that
so thank you for coming and uh I I'll
try to I'll try to you know uh Center
myself a little bit uh here and uh
provide more more coherent
answers
um
okay Neil asks can I talk about any
overlap of NPD and autism you know gosh
I get this question a lot and I want to
preface it by saying that I am not a
specialist uh in the treatment or
assessment or you know anything having
to do with uh ASD autistic uh autism
spectrum disorders um I I have worked uh
with a few patients who um you know had
diagnosed ASD and I understand that
that's becoming more and more common I
think as as you know uh clinicians and
and uh sort of our our society at large
learn learns more about ASD and the
varying ways that it can present and and
uh and so on and so forth um you
know I I would be hardpressed I think to
say
anything uh useful about this except
that
um so yeah I would be hardpressed to say
anything useful about this actually I
think I think I'm going to pass on this
question Neil and and I think that's a
uh an invitation to me to um you know
hit the books and learn a little bit
more about the ways that these two
issues might uh might overlap I I I
don't want to I don't want to say
something and give an answer just to
give an answer and have it be um
incorrect information or have it be you
know off base uh in some way um but I
thank you for the question and uh and I
I will look into that it might actually
be a topic for a future video
okay okay hi Dr eonon can you give
advice for me who's in love with a
pathologically narcissist girlfriend she
has the diagnosis but I really want to
make it work with her uh and love your
content well thank you glad you love the
content
um gosh uh that's a that's a that's a
difficult question as well um so
somebody who has a diagnosed personality
disorder you know that means that you
know that uh there's enough sort of
internal
instability um and uh and you know the
the deficits perhaps in in coping uh and
in
mentalizing um and in communicating are
are significant and severe enough that
you know it has warranted an NPD
diagnosis um so that's going to be a
challenge right it's going to be a
challenge
uh in particular I think uh for you uh
to feel seen to feel like you you sort
of show up and and register in in the
relationship um
particularly uh when the stakes feel
high right um and uh and that's because
when we're talking about personality
disorders you know there there's a
tendency to um become more defensive for
uh um the person to becoming more
preoccupied with um with their own you
know sort of um questions of um and
issues pertaining to um you know
internal uh cohesion and um and you know
and stuff like that right personality
disorders tend to become aggravated in
the context of interpersonal conflict um
and also in the context of um emotional
uh like closeness and intimacy um and so
you know unfortunately those are the
very areas right where you
know like especially in romantic
relationships um that that's you know
we're looking for increased enhanced
emotional intimacy we're looking for
vulnerability uh we we are you know we
want the person to uh be able to you
know depend on us and to you know
Express their um you know um their need
uh for us um and and folks with NPD you
know depending on the configuration that
that can be a real Challenge and so I
think there's a tendency for people in
relationship to people with NPD so the
non- NPD partner to feel invisible to
feel like they um they're they're just
not getting seen right um and this is
this is um actually a an enactment in a
sense uh of of the uh early care
environment for the person who had NPD
right you know the thing that kind of
causes NPD uh well one thing that can
cause NPD uh is not feeling like you
show up you know for the for um to your
caregivers like they like they can see
you like they uh can decode you know how
you feel and what you want and that and
that all of that is okay so there's this
tendency to you know build up this kind
of shell or or this kind of wall we call
it the false self uh and to and to kind
of go inward um and
um and and in doing
that uh people around you then when you
grow up uh can feel like they're not
getting seen and they're not um you know
showing up so I think that that's going
to be probably the biggest challenge um
just kind of across the board uh when I
when I talk and consult with uh family
members and loved ones of people with
NPD um that's often the the thing that I
hear most um and uh and I feel like you
know non-defensive communication is
really key there um you know just
finding a time uh that the the phrase I
heard recently that I really liked and
I've heard it before but it just kind of
brought it back to mind was a strike
when the iron's cold uh so you know wait
for things to settle down to calm down
and then find a time when things aren't
escalated to um to talk about you know
your experience right um if if you're
not feeling uh like like she has space
for you then then letting her know that
and and kind of being curious about what
is her experience when there's conflict
or you know when when these when
whatever the problematic Dynamic that
you're noticing shows up uh ask her you
know in a spirit of open curiosity right
like what's what's going on for you when
this happens and and listen um and I
find that you know giving the person the
feeling of being heard and listened to
helps them to relax those defenses
enough you kind of put their Dukes down
a little bit um that that they they can
then be more receptive to your
experience
um so that's kind of a generic answer
you know obviously if there's if there's
something not okay happening which you
know is sometimes the case in um in you
know relationships with people who have
any personality disorder um you know
because personality disorders involve
emotional disregulation uh and they
involve boundary confusion uh and
impulse control issues um and there's a
tendency to skew or distort perceptions
especially of close interpersonal
relationships if stuff like that has
happened and it's hurting you or you're
you're feeling you know mistreated and
like right um then then that's a
different that's a different situation
uh you need to prioritize taking care of
yourself making sure that you're safe
making sure that um you know you're
getting what you need um and then as
long as that is happening you know then
um see what I said what I just said you
know a couple minutes before um and uh
and best of luck to both you and uh and
your girlfriend I wish you both
well okay Noel asks
uh all right starting to calm down um I
can feel my heart rate like slowing down
a little bit and I'm able to think again
um Noel Noel asks what's the true
definition of narcissist and
narcissistic is the dictionary
wrong uh like the DSM five or is it
right yes um yes it's wrong and yes it's
right um the problem with the dsm5
definition uh is that it's only part of
the story right it it
emphasizes uh
grandiosity and um at the expense of the
other side of the equation which is
vulnerability right so a true definition
of pathological narcissism or and of
pathological narcissism would be um you
know uh issues pertaining to the
inflation or deflation of self-esteem
right okay so disregulated self-esteem
the person's uh self-image is not
realistic and it's not stable okay so
and that can swing both ways okay so
sometimes that swings in the direction
of grandiosity and arrogance and you
know megalomania or whatever and
sometimes it swings in the direction of
a
deflated um self-image okay so you know
self-loathing self hyper criticality
toward the self um and things like that
depressive experiences okay which is why
uh NPD is sometimes mistaken clinically
for bipolar disorders because the you
know you've got these wide swings in
self-image sometimes uh and clinicians
who don't really know very much about
NPD will mistake that for bipolar
disorder and sometimes there's an
overlap as well um
okay so in order to protect against the
deflation of self-esteem okay so
self-esteem loss of self-esteem uh
there's a tendency to inflate
self-esteem and it's not conscious it's
it's just kind of the Dynamics of the
personality okay there's an instability
there uh and so you know because losing
your self-regard and seeing yourself as
worthless uh is so awful there's a
tendency to you really push uh you know
for um positive um uh self-object
experiences positive infusions of
self-esteem okay feeling admired feeling
idealized feeling complimented um
feeling important or privileged um or
exclusive somehow all right so the dsm5
focuses in on the latter part of that
okay they focus in on um what it looks
like when someone with NPD is in what we
call a compensated or grandiose State uh
what they don't talk so much about is
why somebody would be like that why
somebody would be arrogant grandiose why
they would lack empathy why they would
you know uh be engage in exploit
exploitative Behavior Uh with other
people and the reason is because there's
a deficit
underlying uh that that grandio
presentation that compensated defensive
essentially presentation um and uh and
my hope and the hope of a number of
other clinicians and researchers is that
future additions of the DSM will kind of
restore the balance okay because they're
used to be a balance here uh prior to
the mid1 1980s the DSM
uh was more even-handed in terms of
discussing the internal conflicts and
deficits involved in NPD as well as the
way that the person compensates for
those um and then and then it it kind of
went off-kilter uh and it's been that
way for the last 40 years or so and um
35 No 40 yeah 40 years um and and we're
hoping that it they they write the
course with the next Edition they're
starting to little by little um the the
dsm5 text revision that was just
published a few years ago uh it not in
the diagnostic checklist okay that's
still that's been the same for ages
but in the part where it kind of um
describes in narrative form the things
that you'll you might see uh in NPD it's
starting to mention important factors
like uh suicidality so people with NPD
are at risk for suicide um things like
um you know the tendency to
self-medicate with substance abuse uh
the tendency to have like a a
perfectionistic inflexibly
perfectionistic um issues and and the
ways that that that that feeling that
way can cause a collapse into depression
uh in the face of um perceived failure
and and rejection and stuff like that
okay just making sure my mic is still on
all right uh thanks for the question no
and um let's
see XX asks how can individuals with NPD
get more in touch with their authentic
selves that's a good question um pay
attention to how you feel um For Better
or Worse right not not in like a
pressured way not in a I need to feel
this way so I'm G to kind of work myself
into a head space where that's how I
feel because that's I I see that happen
a lot um and and uh not in in
um a way that is hypercritical or overly
judgmental of your uh negative feelings
your your feelings of
inadequacy to the extent that they might
be there or shame or or you know stuff
like that right anxiety because there's
a tendency right for the person to kind
of sit in sternn Judgment of themselves
okay to not treat themselves like a
subject all right like a person but to
treat themselves like an object who's
either doing well or not doing well um
right it's shiny or it's or it's dull uh
it's impressive or it's worthless um
that's not what I'm talking about it's
not it's not actively engaging in in
that assessment of self and and your
self performance in a sense but rather
make trying to make the space as best
you can and when you when you think of
it uh for to just feel however you feel
okay if if you feel like you're not good
enough allow yourself to to kind of be
with that feeling a little bit without
indulging it either right just just kind
of being aware that it's there trying
not to judge that it's there just
allowing it to be um the same thing if
you're feeling great right great enjoy
it allow it to be there without trying
to force it without trying to hold on to
it and cling to it um without needing
for it for only that to be you know the
whole whole truth right um in other
words not trying to exclude the fact
that sometimes you don't feel great um
just allowing it to to just to just be
whatever it is okay maybe it's
complicated maybe it's messy maybe it's
not what you want uh maybe it is what
you want
whatever you know the way that we sort
of encourage authenticity in young
children right is to greet whatever they
bring to us um
with just just a spirit of curiosity and
openness right if they're crying you
know it's not like you know you know
up right wipe those tears off your
face you you know it's not that right
it's it's um it's oh my gosh like are
are you sad oh my gosh what happened you
know and then and and and and trying to
uh welcome that emotional experience
without needing for it to be something
other than what it
is uh and that's that's you know
when little kids are met that way right
um consistently enough then they kind of
uh have an openness to whatever it is
that's coming up inside that that that
line of communication is open and they
can listen to that you know authentic
Wellspring of Joy or sorrow whatever it
is that that's inside of them and use
that to help guide them through life and
relationships to orient them right um
toward toward what is true for them um
and and when kids are kind of cut off
from that somehow when they're very
young not only is it a tragedy but but
they end up very confused sometimes
about what they want how they feel who
they are uh as adults you know they end
up in relationships and they're not sure
if they want to be there right it
because they don't really know how they
feel they know how they're kind of
supposed to feel they know how the other
person wants them to feel and so they
try to give that person that uh but that
but it
inevitably you know doesn't turn out so
well right and and then you know if you
go on like other YouTube channels or my
YouTube channel and you read the
comments you see a lot of comments where
these heartbroken people are like you
know the the narciss IST never loved me
right and and they what the lesson they
derive from that is oh well that person
was lying to me the whole time and maybe
maybe that's true but maybe it's that
the person not only didn't know how they
really felt but they were trying
desperately to sort of act in alignment
with how they thought they were supposed
to feel right
um and uh and and that's that's really
sad when that happens um and uh and so
just trying to make space inside of
yourself for what's true for you whether
it's good whether it's bad whether it's
shiny whether it's dull whether it's
pretty whether it's ugly whatever it is
and however whatever judgments you have
about it recognize that those judgments
well well they're they're kind of a part
of this system of of of trying to um
make yourself good enough to Warrant
love uh and and and the fact of the
matter is you don't have to be good
enough to be loved that's not what love
is um and if that's what you learned
love was when you were little uh then
I'm you
know I think that's that's really sad
and I think it's okay to be sad about
that um and to be gentle with the part
of yourself that was hurt that way if
that's what happened um so but I hope
that answers your question and uh thank
you okay Rita asks why doesn't why does
a
narc I understand this this is the the
common abbreviation but it's just a
little bit
dehumanizing uh disappear all of a
sudden without any apparent
reason
um well a little bit of what I was just
saying uh that there there there can
be confusion inside about what the
person actually wants and how they
actually feel and there's this you know
so when we talk about like a false self
uh you might have heard that term in
some of the videos that I've made and
stuff um the false self is the child's
best effort to be the person they think
they have to be in order to be worth
anything okay and it comes from having
experienced some kind of conditional
love right you know ideally we're loved
unconditionally okay whoever we happen
to be right you know however Nature Made
Us you know and and I think we're all
sort of entitled to having some part of
our life where we're just loved just for
being who and what we are uh where
there's no pressure to be anything in
particular in order to earn that love
right um and and when people don't get
that um then they they try to force
themselves into this shape that they
think will make them worthy of love and
in so doing they cut themselves off or
they become cut off because it's not
conscious from what's true for them on
an emotional level and and not only that
but so much water goes under the bridge
over time and across relationships or
across the same relationship that they
end up four five years in and or you
know whatever and and now they're like
oh my gosh how do I even feel about this
person I I don't know you know uh but
now it's like well you they feel like
they couldn't possibly be honest about
that because they feel like they've done
something wrong now um and I I hear
about this a lot in in the work that I
do with patients uh this dilemma that
comes up that's one of the dilemas
another dilemma is uh called a
dependency dilemma and that's uh the
issue is that
um being vulnerable uh in the context of
close
relationships um exposes it exposes the
person to their
underlying dependency okay and we all
have dependency right we all dependency
longings we all need people we need to
be loved we need to be whatever it is
right held um seen okay but there's
there's this way that people with
NPD uh have learned that okay the answer
is to be perfectly self-sufficient all
right or at least to experience
themselves as perfectly
self-sufficient um and and that has to
do with uh if if you read kernberg it
has to do with intolerable frustrations
when they were babies essentially right
they have these needs to to be loved a
certain way and they weren't and it's so
frustrating and that frustration is so
toxic and so pervasive in their little
self structure that they just they have
to figure out some way to shortcircuit
the relational experiences that are
causing the frustration and so the way
they do that is to try to merge with
their own uh IDE ego ideal okay so that
and the fantasy there the unconscious
fantasy is that they'll never need
anything again if they're able to be
perfect they won't have to feel
frustrated anymore if they're perfect um
and the problem is that that kind of a
split it's because that's a split right
okay I'm going to cut myself off from
all the things all the parts of me that
need something and I'm gonna fantasize
that I'm instead need less so that's a
split inside the the uh
personality it it means that all of the
dependency stuff gets like concentrated
it becomes this super
concentrated mass of infantile
dependency longings right like
not just needing somebody but like
needing people in the way that like
two-year-olds need people you know um
and and when things get split off like
that then they they don't get worked on
they don't get Incorporated and in into
the adult personality and they don't get
uh sort of modified into this kind of
more moderate realistic integrated form
over time they just stay kind of cut off
and concent
and and now it becomes a real problem
right because the the adult is like you
know I don't know how to be right in in
close relationships because I feel on
some level inside of me a bottomless
dependency that if I ever let out I'm
absolutely sure would drive everyone
away and so I have to kind of keep it
split off and keep it hidden and I have
to keep trying to compensate for the
fact that it's there I have to keep
pretending that I don't need anything
and showing you what I think you want to
see in order to be worth something and
and therefore loved by you um so over
time that becomes so exhausting that
eventually the person just throws up
their hands and they're like I I can't I
can't do this anymore right they reach
some critical mass and they're like I
can't do it anymore and then they just
leave sometimes um that's the second
issue that comes up and the third issue
that comes up has to do with um
splitting and a in a specific instance
of splitting a special case of splitting
that happens in NPD more often than
other personality disorders and that's
called idealizing and devaluing
so you know like I said before in
personality disorders the boundaries are
really porous like they're not well
defined um and that has to do with the
fact that the self is just not
well developed and well integrated okay
so you know it's what is self and what
isn't well I depends on the situation
right um and so because of that there
can be a lot of
confusion now the the self needs to
perceive itself as perfect right and
self-sufficient how do we get that need
met well by being P by being uh
idealized by other perfect people right
okay uh uh so and and and by being um in
um like associated with perfect people
okay
so that's what people with NPD have a
tendency to do they'll they'll find
somebody who they genu to whom they're
genuinely attracted or you know they
genuinely
admire and that person will be perceived
by them to be
Flawless and they'll think I've finally
found the you know the one right and
when they're with that sort of idealized
person they themselves feel ideal okay
they feel in alignment with that ego
ideal that I was talking about
before now over time because nobody's
perfect disappointments will start to
accumulate in the in the context of the
relationship and they'll start to you
know that that idealized image of the
other person will start to like show
cracks you
know and and because of the poorest
boundaries they will experience those
imperfections okay as
betrayals and as contempt right um and
and
eventually it'll get to be to the point
where again a kind of critical mass is
reached and the idealization flips into
a devaluation okay they move from the
idealized side of the split to the
devalued side of the
split and suddenly that idealized person
is perceived to be absolutely just the
worst person ever uh not only that but
in their perception it's always been
that way and maybe they just didn't see
it you know so the present is Rewritten
but also all of history is Rewritten and
this is kind of the the thing with
splitting right it's not just black and
white thinking it's the person shifts
from an idealizing and idealized self
State into a devaluing and devalued
self- State and when they do that all of
reality changes around them okay and the
context of the relationship changes with
that and so now suddenly they feel like
leaving you is what they should have
done immedi like they they shouldn't
have spent any time with you at all
right um they might even feel like
they're um they're sticking up for
themselves in some way they're writing a
wrong they're correcting an injustice by
leaving you uh and
and when when they're viewing it through
that
lens it's it's not it's it's not that
they're cutting and and running and
leaving you holding a big bag of
right it's that you've been um deceiving
them them or hurting them or something
right the whole time and now they're
finally taking their life back and
that's how it can feel
um and and you as a person maybe who's
not splitting is like what in the hell
just happened and a reasonable person
would deduce from that experience that
that that the narcissist is
um uh you know conniving and
uh calculating and deceiving and
manipulative and um you know like
they're real evil person right but that
assumes that there's a there's a
consistency in their worldview okay and
that they were sort of planning this the
whole time and that's not the case
necessarily remember there are splits in
the self and what's on what's in the
devalued place okay the the V vulnerable
place so to
speak the grandiose idealizing part of
the self doesn't have access to that and
vice versa all right these splits are
maintained by dissociative phenomena
they're not you know it's like being on
one Island and you know trying to get to
another Island like you can't get there
from here okay it it it's only when uh
the sort of what whatever um conditions
are met and then there's a sudden shift
suddenly you're not on the first island
suddenly you're on the other Island and
everything looks different from that
Island okay so I hope that explains it
uh that was a long winded answer but I I
hope that's helpful and thanks for the
question okay uh doc please tell me how
to understand that I am already at a
neurotic level of
narcissism so are you saying that you
think you're at a neurotic level of
narcissism and you want me to tell you
how to know for sure um
well uh okay so now
remember and for anybody who doesn't is
not a uh familiar with this terminology
this is there's a developmental Spectrum
all right uh in terms of the severity of
a personality issue um and the the the
higher up the developmental Spectrum you
go the less severe the personality issue
is um personality disorders occur at the
bottom half of that developmental
Spectrum um and then when you get above
that bottom half it's no longer a
personality disorder now it's more like
a personality style okay um the the core
conflicts and issues are the same but
but the M the personality has matured
and developed around those core issues
and conflicts so that they're not so
disruptive anymore um and uh and and the
person is kind of able to not only see
themsel as a whole object a whole person
uh but also to see and relate to other
people as whole people not split parts
of people like I was just
describing
so that being said uh it's important to
recognize that we all move around on
this spectrum okay um but typically
um only to the
adjacent um sort of strata all right so
the bottom is is the psychotic level and
I just made a video about that so check
that out on my channel if you want
um another word for that level would be
like a kind like like a very
developmentally early
immature way of being in the world okay
so developmentally immature that even
reality isn't consistent okay like like
for very little kids you know um they
they change reality all the time they
reality is fluid to them they don't have
the same kind of stable relationship
with reality that most adults do where
it's like uh I want that to be true but
it's not true right now ask a
three-year-old and they're like yeah
that's true why why because I imagined
it you know I mean and they mean it
right you know thoughts and actions are
equivalent to two-year olds and
three-year olds okay and and ideally we
all kind of grow out of that but if
there's too much trauma if there's too
much instability if like life is
throwing too much at you and you
it's overwhelm in like your little mind
uh you might not you might be so kind of
buckled down uh that that you you don't
have the ability to um kind of mature
out of that mode of of um perceiving and
and
experiencing after
reality uh you reach What's called the
the sort of borderline level okay and
the in the borderline level the the
relationship to reality is more stable
although it's not perfectly stable um
and now the issue is more centered
around individuation okay so separating
psychologically from other people
remember earlier I was talking about how
in personality disorders there's poorest
boundaries well that's that's why okay
it's not as we kind of consolidate a
sense of self in a
self-image we're we're kind of learning
okay this is me and that's you all right
um
but trauma and overwhelming stress and
adverse childhood experiences and stuff
like that that can really interrupt uh
the development of those boundaries and
uh especially if there's like abuse
happening like physical abuse sexual
abuse emotional abuse like stuff where
somebody is like intrusively crossing
your boundaries on a regular basis how
on Earth are you supposed to develop any
kind of stable consistent sense of what
you and what's not you you know
so that's the borderline
level uh and then the next level that
you mature into is the neurotic level
and this is what this uh viewer is is
asking about what happens is you get
this sense of okay this is me and this
is not me and it's fairly stable and
that the self-image becomes fairly
stable as well and and typically more
integrated okay okay so there's not a
lot of split-off parts there's not a lot
of internal you know siloing of parts of
the self but instead it's kind of all
sort of fluid
um and when that happens um there's
there's kind of like this quickening
almost there's like there's the
appearance of abilities that weren't
previously there okay and one of them is
the ability to
grieve uh and and the reason being that
when you're still in that borderline or
psychotic
space um loss isn't real in the same way
that it is when you can't blur the
boundary blur the line between self and
other or distort
reality uh to in order to
neutralize grief and and guilt and
things like that okay so um people in in
at the board line level of
organization it's not that it's not that
they can't you know experience loss
right
but when they do something to that that
hurts someone else there's a tendency to
kind of not see it or to cover it over
with you know magical thinking or or to
project you know some devalued part of
the self onto the other person and then
rationalize what you did after the fact
by well they deserved it because or
whatever it is right there's a way of
kind of where like the things that you
do aren't real in the same way that they
are at the neurotic level okay and um
and you know oftentimes you'll hear
things you know from people like you
loved ones of people with personality
disorders who who will say things like
you know one minute they're screaming at
me and then the next minute it's like
nothing happened and if I try to bring
up what happened if I try to like hold
them accountable for screaming at me
then they they rage at me for you know
trying to make them feel bad or whatever
it is right like in other words there's
just because the continuity of
experience inside the person with the
personality disorder is disrupted okay
by splitting and other things like
that um they're not
tracking what's happening
interpersonally in the same way that
somebody who's not doing that is
tracking Okay so
um when you get to the neurotic level of
of of
experiencing loss becomes real in a way
that it wasn't before um you can't sort
of take whatever it was that was ideal
about the person that you lost and just
transfer it over to somebody else who
you're idealizing now for instance you
can't undo the feeling of deficit inside
of yourself by flipping over to a
grandio side of the split okay and just
now suddenly don't have any deficits you
know so that's the kind of magical kind
of thinking that's happening at the
borderline level that now is no longer
possible at the neurotic level
unless there's so much stress or
emotional overwhelm that the person
regresses back to a kind of a a more
borderline level of of negotiating
experience and that happens okay so
people at the psychotic level can poke
up into the borderline level and then
back down people at the borderline level
can poke down into psychotic or up into
neurotic people at neurotic can poke
down into borderline and up into healthy
um so one way you can know if you're
kind of at that neurotic level is you
know what what is kind of dominating
your thoughts is it is it feelings of
guilt and concern about things you've
done that might have hurt somebody else
uh is it fear of the loss of people who
are important to you um or are you more
concerned with
self-preservation okay the the the
clinical terms for those two kinds of
anxiety are neurotic anxiety and
paranoid anxiety so paranoid anxiety is
about loss of self and that's the kind
of anxiety that dominates psychotic and
borderline experience okay when you get
up into the neurotic and healthy levels
it flips over because now the self-image
is fairly stable okay it so it flips to
loss of object loss of Love loss of the
people who are important to you fear
that you're are going to hurt them
somehow or betray them somehow or
disappoint them somehow and that's why
neurotic defenses are much more about
concealing um destructive impulses like
defenses like uh repression or
rationalization or intellectualization
or isolation of affect these are
neurotic defenses that protect the ego
so to speak from sort of the anxiety it
has about harming its
objects versus borderline level defenses
which are more about getting rid of of
EX of internal experience that the self
structure can't tolerate okay that
threatens to undo whatever stability
there is inside the
self so I hope that isn't too like you
know
um abstract you know uh I I hope that
helps I'm going to make my next video is
going to be about NPD at the borderline
level and then the one after that's
going to be about NPD at the neurotic
level so uh stay tuned for that it'll go
into much more detail about this stuff
and thanks for the
question all
right okay there is a question here
that's in an alphabet I cannot read um
and I so I apologize but I can't I can't
read the this question
um okay my halo
within asks how how do we know how many
npds there truly are considering they
don't typically go to a therapist online
seems to promote an unknown as fact that
they cannot be healed okay first of all
this nonsense about can't be healed you
know thumbs down okay uh that's just not
my experience it's just not it's it's
false
um there are some people who are
treatment resistant to the point where
they probably will never make
substantial progress okay and that's
true for any disease that is true for
any illness I don't care what it is
there are people who cannot get better
from where they are because of the
nature of their illness or the nature of
their you know psychology or the nature
of their physical Constitution whatever
it is okay whether we're talking about
mental or physical wellness um you know
and and that's just a fact all right but
there's nothing about NPD that like
intrinsically uh you just can't get
better that's I that idea either rests
on
outdated
um limitations in our uh Theory okay so
old
um old
psychoanalytic uh models they didn't
know how to treat anything below the
neurotic level right uh and so they were
they were flxs you know and especially
uh with NPD and that's because n people
with NPD tend not to form an
objectoriented transference all right so
that they're not transferring their
relationship with their dad onto you as
the therapist okay instead what they're
doing is they are transferring some
aspect of themselves onto you as the
therapist okay so it's a selfobject
transference okay not not an object
oriented transference and it took a
while for uh Theory to kind of wrap its
mind around that okay uh and in fact it
took until around the 1960s before
started to get a sense of oh what is
this actually and uh especially when uh
kernberg and cohut came on the scene uh
and and did their seminal Works uh in
the treatment of in conceptualization of
NPD that's when people started to be
like oh wait I think I starting to get a
sense of how we might be able to treat
this okay so that was that was 60 years
ago or so all right so you know this
idea that it's somehow not treatable is
at least that far out of date
um or it rests on some kind of
idea I think that's promoted has been
promoted online in the last 25 years or
so that
um there the authentic self in NPD is
dead and buried and cannot ever
be resurrected okay that it's that it is
just it is false through and through all
the way down like it's you know they
used to say it's Turtles all the way
down okay so in
this conceptualization
it's it's false all the way down um and
that's that's it's just not true it's
obviously not true at some level we're
going to run into the the the fact of
Pleasure and Pain for instance right
pain is noxious pleasure is uh desirable
okay so at some point we're going to run
into the organicity of the person and at
that point right you know uh you get
poked with a needle ouch all right well
oh look we have authentic experience
you know so like there there's always
authentic experience there and it can
always be built on um and and so I just
you this idea that you know NPD is
somehow the only mental disorder that
you know can't can't can't be healed it
it no uh nope okay so
anyway H sorry I got I I I got really uh
into into my fire about that I apologize
if I've gone off track
here uh how do we know how many people
with NPD there truly are okay um well we
don't right uh this has to do with
limitations in uh how it is
conceptualized in our diagnostic uh
manuals and it also has to do with
limitations in the research right so
prior to uh like 2009 or 2011 one of
those two so fairly recently
um all research on NPD almost used an
instrument called the NPI uh which is
the narcissistic personality inventory
and this what I talked about in my very
first video it it forms a feedback loop
okay so the uh the DSM says well n NPD
is this okay and then um and it's all
those grandiose things right and then
some researchers came along and they
said well let's make an instrument to
assess it and so they used those
checklists and they made an instrument
to assess those things AR grandiosity
overconfidence okay stuff like that um
and they even said right in in in the
article where they publish their
instrument they even say like this
instrument assesses these qualities okay
and it describes somebody who's really
confident who's gregarious who's you
know can can work a room uh stuff like
that um so they're not talking about
mental illness right that's not a
definition of mental illness that's just
somebody who's like kind of full of
themselves um but they they took it off
the DSM checklist okay and then for the
next 40 years or whatever 30 30
years 76% of all research into NPD used
that instrument okay so over three
quarters of all research looking at NPD
used this instrument that was derived
from the DSM checklist that only
encapsulated Ates half of of the
disorder all right and it's just it's
the compensated half so it cuts out the
the actual mental
illness that that is there as a basis as
a need for the
compensation uh so you know of course
they come up with all kinds of you know
figures right um and and there's a
notable difference if you look at the
research identifying NPD using
instruments like the
NPI versus going out and asking
clinicians to estimate what percentage
of their case load has NPD right because
even though there are a lot of
clinicians out there who don't know the
first thing about NPD there are also a
lot of clinicians who do and and have
enough of an awareness about what NPD is
to know that it's not always that
grandiose arrogant thing right in fact
often time often times it isn't and in
the literature going back at least 60
years there's a consistent
identification this is the clinical in
now there's a consistent identification
of two prototypical presentations of NPD
one is fragile the other one is
compensated one's vulnerable the other
one's
grandiose and it's it's contributed to
this myth that these are two you two
different kinds of narcissist it's not
really true all presentations of NPD
have both grandiose and vulnerable overt
and covert components overt just means
what you can see covert means what you
can't see vulnerable has to do with the
depressive experience uh and the
dependency uh side of the equation uh
grandiose has to do with the false self
uh compensations okay all people with
NPD have both of those some mixture it's
usually very complex um there might be
one that's more predominant than the
other uh but there there's always both
um okay
so I guess what I'm getting at here is
it really depends how we Define NPD and
how we assess uh NPD and you're going to
get different figures depending on those
factors um so you know I've seen like
you know NPI like that grandiose
DSM uh NPD seen figures less than 1% of
the
population you know of course that's
that's ridiculous that less than 1% of
the population has
NPD um but you know if all we're looking
for is that grandiose sort of
compensated
presentation then you know maybe that's
maybe that is true maybe 1% around of of
people are in that kind of hyper
compensated grandio State at any given
time I actually think it's probably
higher than that
um I think that every clinician out
there has somebody who's got a
significant level of pathological
narcissism in their case load and they
may not realize it they may misdiagnose
it as depression as bipolar 2 disorder
they may see it as dependency I'm sorry
dependent personality disorder they may
misdiagnose it as
BPD um they may uh think that it is
um uh like a some kind of a chronic
depressive
presentation um you know persistent
depressive disorder or something like
that used to be called um dysphoria I'm
sorry
um the word flew right on my head it'll
come to me in a few minutes but um
anyway it's currently impossible to
diagnose somebody in a vulnerable state
with NPD using the DSM you just can't do
it if you're going by the sort of
checklist criteria okay um and uh and
that's that's that's a real problem and
one of the reasons why you know there's
a big push to significantly revise uh
the D the next edition of the DSM with
respect to
NPD
okay where are
we all right
Ernest please tell the process of
restoring effective empathy during
therapy what results can be expected
okay is a great question uh and I need
to take a sip of
my soay uh to answer
it all right so the issue here has to do
with uh another persistent myth about
NPD and that is that the person is
somehow like incapable of
empathy that may be true for some people
who have NPD but I would argue that for
those people there's also a significant
component of psychopathy right so uh you
know where like people for whom there is
just kind of like a constitutional or
perhaps organic inability to
empathize just like straight NPD right
uh without some other complication
I do not uh think it's not been my
experience that there is no ability to
empathize um there is impaired ability
ability to empathize for some now
remember and this is something people
don't really know uh but in order to
diagnose NPD and I I realize now that
I'm borrowing from the very problematic
diagnostic Paradigm that I was just like
lambasting but um so the DSN M model
okay you have to have five of nine
criteria to qualify for NPD impaired
empathy is one of them all right so it's
totally possible to be diagnosed with
NPD using the DSM criteria without
impaired empathy okay so some that's
it's not necessary for an NPD
diagnosis that being said I think that
in most NPD presentations there is
impaired empathy and I would argue that
in most personality disorder
presentations there's some kind of
impaired empathy and the reason being
remember what I was saying about the
borderline which is different I should
have said this earlier the borderline
range of of functioning is different
than BPD okay BPD is named after the
borderline range of functioning all
right but they're different
things in the border the borderline
range is called that because it's on the
border between neurotic and psychotic
okay in the borderline range
remember the preoccupation is with
preservation of self right defending
against paranoid anxiety about loss of
self so that kind of egocentrism is
there in every personality disorder okay
it's not just NPD doesn't matter what
the personality disorder is there's
always going to be a kind of egocentrism
a kind of
preoccupation with am I okay
right uh and and that makes sense
developmentally you know we all go
through a phase where we we don't see
other people right not as other people
we see them as dependency figures right
you know caregivers this is my mom this
is my dad this is my aunt this is my
uncle right uh and we and we we we view
those relationships through the lens of
what they provide for us how they make
us feel right right we don't see that
there's an internal World in each of
those people and that they have their
own private life and private thoughts
and private feelings right we don't get
it when we're
young for p people with personality
disorders cognitive capabilities might
continue to develop right so they get on
a conceptual abstracted level that there
is an internal World in each of the
people around them but on an affective
level on the level of like like their
sort of basic you know patterns of
experiencing and and
perceiving they might not get that um
and they might still be operating from
that essentially
egocentric
Place uh and and again this is true for
any personality disorder not just
NPD NPD gets uh the reputation for being
like the impaired empathy you know
disorder because uh there tends to be
callous treatment of
others when devaluing all right
so because the person needs so
desperately to have and hold that
experience of inflated
self-esteem and because they need to
idealize people and idealize themselves
in order to maintain that whenever
somebody acts outside of the kind of
range of behavior that is in alignment
with that
idealization then there's a tendency to
devalue them all right and that
typically involves callous treatment of
the person critical treatment of the
person uh you know right like not not
being kind right okay when we're
devaluing somebody we kind of by
definition not being
kind and that tends to be such a
prominent
feature of NPD presentations that
impaired empathy has become a part of
the diagnostic criteria for
NPD but like I said you'll find impaired
empathy in any personality disorder
um and it's not because there's some
part of like the brain can't empathize
it's because there's preoccupation with
self and
self-preservation um so for somebody
with NPD when the St are low you
know there's empathy typically uh
somebody gets like you know like
collapses in the store and somebody with
NPD will typically go over and oh my
gosh are you okay and right and trying
to help
them uh you know try or trying to
comfort somebody who's who's upset right
or whatever you know it's not that they
they like human feelings are anma to
them somehow like they get it
right but when the stakes feel
higher uh when the heat is on so to
speak that's when the defenses start to
Rally uh and that's when the level of
empathy tends to go down okay because
the focus now is on
self-preservation
um
okay uh what am I trying to say here
that's that's part of it another part of
it has to do with
not being able to give what you haven't
got all right so it is widely believed
by myself included that NPD is partly
due to not having been empathized with
as a young child uh not having your
internal States right uh seen and
mirrored by other people around you to
help you understand and decode what's
going on inside
so when you haven't had that experience
it's then hard for you to give it to
anybody else and it's also hard to kind
of it's It's almost like the more of
that we get the more of it we have and
when we have enough of
it we can kind of put down some of those
concerns about self-preservation and we
have more to give to other people and so
this this kind of to answer your
question and I'm sorry I took the long
way to to the the answer um in the in
the context of a therapy relationship
with somebody who has
NPD so much of that therapy is just the
therapist trying to get empathically
what's going on inside the person right
trying to really get it right trying and
not not like not like in a oh I see
you're sad kind of way but like in a way
where you're like trying to like take it
in and feel it for yourself so that you
can then give it back to the person in a
way that allows them to feel
seen and you just do that over and over
and over again sometimes for a long time
however long it
takes for the person to have soaked up
enough that now they've they've got it
and now they can begin to give it all
right so um
that that's that's not and it's not just
what I have to say about it um uh Glenn
gabard and Holly crisp I think that's I
think it's Holly crisp uh wrote an
article about four years ago about just
a treatment of NPD um and uh and and
they they essentially had the same thing
to say um that you know there's often a
prolonged period in treatment of NPD
where you're just trying to mirror and
empathize um as well as other things too
right I mean you're you know you're like
hey you know like let's let's talk about
how we can cope better with blah blah
blah or let's talk about what actually
happened in your argument with your
spouse or right I mean I get it like
you're not just like sitting there being
like Oh I'm so sad for you but but that
is a part of it you know because the
person grew up without that and and
there and and they often times just feel
like they don't they can't see
themselves because nobody's ever seen
them and they've never had that
experience that relational experience of
being seen and taking that in and being
like oh oh that's what's going on or oh
that's how I feel right um and once they
they're able to get enough of that they
start to be able to offer it to other
people as well so thanks for the
question all right
most of us likely have anxiety and your
experience is validating okay thank you
uh yes uh I was being swallowed by
anxiety when I started this uh this live
stream um I'm not now but um yeah it
happens it absolutely happens and and I
just try
to just try to let it be you know let
the anxiety be and uh you know and and
it it tends to go away when when you do
that um or not or sometimes it doesn't
and you just you
know you you fall hard and um and life
goes on so but thank you for thank you
for letting me know
um all right let's
see all right I had before testing
thought I was NPD found out I was cptsd
and more how similar are the two outside
of empathy well there there are
different like ideas about cptsd so
people who like like if you go to like
the like cptsd
forums some of them will be adamant
like you know complex trauma is not the
same as personality disorder um and
maybe they're right I you know I think
the the concept of complex trauma is
still evolving all right so it's not for
instance in the DSM yet although it
likely will be in the next
Edition I think collectively we are
coming to understand mental
illness increasingly from a
trauma-informed
perspective uh increasingly we
are like realizing that there's kind of
a normative trajectory of development
all right you know all things being kind
of like all the parts being being where
they're supposed to be or whatever like
there tends to be a normative uh course
of human development um and and when
adverse experiences happen during
especially those first four or five
years of development it can really have
a substantial impact on um on the you
know the personality right um and uh and
and so you know that's that's trauma
okay and and interestingly you know if
you go all the way back to like the
beginning of
psychology um you know and Freud and
Brer Joseph Brer Brer uh they were
collaborating at the end of the 19th
century and the beginning of the 20th
century uh on and really coming up with
some like groundbreaking
ideas
breer's uh model was trauma based and
had it not been for Freud I think uh
psychology would have started as a
trauma
informed science of the mind and it
would have stayed that way um but but we
had Freud and he took it in a different
direction for a while and now we're kind
of coming back around um and so I see
personality disorder as trauma based uh
and and I see it as complex trauma now
I'm not saying it's cptsd right I'm
saying it is a a condensation
of many
traumas that occurred uh mostly in in a
relational
context uh and that impaired or
inhibited the development of ego
functions and capacities that we rely on
as adults to navigate the world in a way
that isn't disruptive and disordered and
maladaptive all right
um and uh
so I don't I you know I I don't see a
big difference between like NPD or BPD
or you know ocpd whatever it is any
personality disorder and complex trauma
I think they're I think we're talking
about kind of the same thing uh like I
said people in cptsd forums might
vehemently disagree with that um and I
think the way that cptsd is defined in
like the uh the ICD for instance um it
it it requires you know a certain kind
of trauma uh to to qualify and I might
not be talking about that kind of trauma
the kind of trauma I'm talking about is
relational trauma trauma that occurs in
the context of those early care
relationships uh and um because that's
how we build a self right that our self
is is built relationally you know that
the the person you are your personality
it's all of it your whole psychology is
relational whether it involves a
relationship with self or a relationship
with other it's all relationship and and
the things that happen in those very
early relationships they get in on the
ground floor and they can they can have
tremendous impact on the the kinds of
relationships a person ends up having in
adulthood both with other people and
with themselves it kind of goes back to
that first question that was asked uh so
so thank
you oh also uh real quick you you you
specifically talk about empathy here
again I think anytime somebody is
dealing with being triggered okay if
you're if you've got PTSD of some kind
complex or otherwise and you're getting
triggered uh in situations your empathy
goes right out the window right um
because you're preoccupied now with
survival right and and that is exactly
what I was talking about with other
personality disorders right why there's
impaired empathy and personality
disorders or at the borderline level of
functioning it's because the person is
constantly getting triggered right and
and now they're preoccupied with
survival right paranoid anxiety holding
the self together having a functional
self-image right not falling apart not
losing the self and and and going into
like these awful unimaginable states of
being uh that our whole personality
really is built to defend against um and
uh so yeah there's no empathy when
somebody's triggered uh you know that's
it's it's in incompatible right um to be
to be empathic means you have enough
you're stable enough that you're like
here I am and there you are right but
when you know you're triggered in trauma
no you're not you're not functioning on
that level there's no empathy um until
empathy is
restored uh and um you know you calm
down right or
whatever so um thank
you all right I'm I'm running out of
time everybody goodness gracious boy
this blew right by um I you know I I it
is my it is my aspirational goal to do
one of these every month and uh some
months I'm able to do that and some
months I'm not uh and um I'm glad I was
able to do it today uh and I hope to be
able to do it again next month because I
just love doing these like once I get
over my like you know anxiety about
whatever um I I love it and I I love
that you're here and I love your
questions um and uh it just feels like a
special thing you know um I think so
rarely are um discussions like
this had about NPD where it's not about
like throwing someone in the garbage can
but rather it's about like hey how can
we how can we understand you know um
what what happens and why uh so I I just
so much appreciate everybody being
here
um why do I have facial fat when I'm
skinny I I just don't know um I hope you
hope you get that get that sorted out
thanks for the question
um your live chats get recorded and I
know people watch them at their own
convenience yes yeah and thank you and I
realized I'm only seven minutes into the
you know this this question or comment
was posted at 207 so um thank you for
the thank you for taking care of me
there uh I appreciate
it all right
let's
see this is a good one why narcissism is
it close to home with yourself or family
you know um why why does any clinician
specialize in whatever they specialize
in right I mean
um a boundary that I keep intentionally
in my in my work uh at least my work on
YouTube and podcasts and stuff like that
is that I don't I I don't base any of
what I say you know like I don't appeal
to like like a personal trauma history
or or my own you mental health
diagnosis if I have one or you right
like this isn't like my time to like air
my you know personal issues or prosecute
my personal grudges right um I just I
just don't feel like that belongs here
and I feel like it would all it would do
is obfuscate and muddy the the water
right because then it would be like is
Dr enson saying that because you know
his like Grandpa was a narcissist or
whatever you know or is it because it's
in the literature right um or it's his
clinical experience I feel like if if my
role is as an author is as an authority
okay um and a source of information for
people I want that role to be to not be
um uh what's I'm looking for here
um you know like uh confused I guess
with
um uh you know like my like my own
personal mental health or or whatever
you know and I understand that that's
not common I understand that there's
actually like a number of YouTube like
psychologists or therapists or whatever
that you know their whole thing is like
I'm a trauma Survivor and here's what
what I have to say about it and and
great great for them and great for that
um but that's not what I'm trying to do
here uh and so um I just I feel like
it's it's just not good professional
boundaries and I feel like it muddies
the water and I feel like it um
might in some way impair my ability to
treat patients right so remember um this
isn't like my full-time gig right like
being a YouTube YouTube person um I I
have a full clinical practice uh that I
do every day and I see patients every
day and I treat groups and I consult and
I assess uh and and in the context of
those treatment settings there needs to
be some uh well abound right I need to
hold a clinical frame to varying degrees
depending on the patient some patients
are you know doing well enough that I I
can let a little bit more of myself
enter the room but some patients they
need for me to not to not like really
like they need for me to hold that
boundary okay to protect them and their
ability to have a safe space there there
are people in the world who have been so
intruded upon emotionally or personally
that if I were to like be a personality
you know um and then try to treat
patients who who might have some of
those issues um it would it would uh
kill the treatment before it even
started and so I I try to prioritize
that as well it's also one of the
reasons why I won't do case studies and
I won't specifically site you know like
oh well there was this one patient who X
Y and Z and if I do say something like
that I ensure that it's it is so like
washed of any personal details or
identifying data that I could literally
be talking about anyone
um it's because my first priority is to
the Integrity of my clinical work um and
so um I just won't I just won't disclose
my like yeah my you know psychiatric
history or my whatever right it's not a
part of except to say when when I'm
anxious that I'm anxious because it's I
think probably pretty obvious um when I
when I'm
anxious uh and that's yeah that's you
know that's a part of uh my psychology
that I get I get anxious in front of a
crowd so um okay thanks for the
question um oh one thing I will say
about it also T Wells is that
um all of us
have like narcissism right and I don't
mean all of us have pathological
narcissism but narcissism is just a term
for the relationship you have with
yourself okay so to to a varying uh
degree you have a healthy relationship
with yourself or you have a pathological
relationship with yourself um and
so and I see the way that that
relationship with self is built as as
being you know like
so in So like
um integrally like uh wrapped up in in
that early care
setting um that
um I just I when I when I talk about
narcissism um I really I feel like I'm
I'm you know talking about like
um you know
I don't know what I'm trying to say
I guess what I'm trying to say is
um I I just I feel strongly about you
know caring for and and and
and and loving and and
honoring
um anyone you know people but especially
little kids and and and little children
and I see this way that I see NPD as as
you know
rooted in like just like
tragedy at at that at that age you know
like like little kids like who just want
to be loved and want to feel accepted
and and they're and they're learning who
about who they are right and what
they're getting back uh is is is stuff
that they can't use and and it and it
turns into a life time of paying um and
and when I see that and when I think
about that uh just it like you know like
it I I'm I feel moved um on an emotional
level when I think about that and
um and and I think that's why I'm good
at this work um because I think
narcissists can be so hard to love
because of what they're putting out
which is this facade of self-sufficiency
and you know or arrogance or or whatever
it is right it's it can be hard to get
close and I feel like um because I don't
I I have a tendency to see everyone uh
to to a greater or lesser extent as
little kids and see them in the context
of those early formative
experiences um I just I just go right to
it typically and and I think it feels
like being found to people and and that
that's meaningful to me um just as sure
as if I was
coming up you know to try to help a
kiddo who who who was lost in a store or
something you know um so I don't know if
that helps but that's that's my answer
just got a couple minutes left here
um and uh I'm sorry I didn't get to uh
to the rest of these questions I there's
some good ones here um thank you all
again for joining I guess I want to
spend just a minute to talk about uh you
know my practice and the services I
offer and stuff like that um so you know
like I said I've got a full-time
practice uh and I do offer uh individual
therapy although my practice my
individual practice is full and I have a
weight list right now one thing I want
to put out there though is that I'm
looking at expanding my practice um and
uh you know I've got I've got a a
significant weight list and um and I
want to offer treatment to more people
and so I'm looking at hiring um a uh you
know somebody to to work with me
basically a the a licensed or
pre-licensed uh therapist to work with
me uh so if anybody out there is you
know fits that bill and there're might
be interested um send shoot me an email
um my email you can contact me on my
website which is heal nd.org um and let
me know uh because I'm I'm I'm in I'm
actively searching uh for um somebody
who can join my practice and who who you
know can can think about these issues
and work with these uh problems um from
a a similar perspective um and you know
of course I would I would be there as
well um to consult with and and Andor
train that person so reach out if that's
something that's interesting to you um I
also offer group therapy and I currently
right now don't have a weit list for
group therapy
um I uh I have two groups running right
now uh but I'm I'm open to uh to
starting a third if there's interest uh
those typically run for about an hour
and 15 minutes once a week they're
capped at six people per group um and
they're ongoing open uh process groups
so you know it's it's a it's a support
group really um I'm there for every
group meeting and uh and um you know I
think one of the things that's really
beautiful about group work with NPD is
that it so much that you know like of th
so many of those like secret shames that
that people tend to have inside of
themselves they they can get normalized
um and the shame can go down uh and I
and I think uh people can find belonging
in acceptance that way and and it just
it lessens the you know takes the teeth
out of some some of those uh aspects of
the disorder um so if you're interested
in that send me an email as well and
finally I do um I do personality
assessments and I I have just a very
small weight list for those those are
not like I give you an mmpi or something
and then tell you the results those are
comprehensive personality assessments um
I meet with people uh sometimes anywhere
between like six sometimes as many as
nine or 10 times and we do a structured
clinical interview
I give you a bunch of Assessments to uh
complete uh and um and I really strive
to you know bring the Same Spirit uh you
know that that I have on my channel and
in my clinical work uh in my therapy
work to the to these assessments so it's
not just about like do you have NPD or
not it's like um you know is it NPD or
is it BPD or is it something else or you
know to what extent uh does depression
play a role or biip bipolar uh disorder
or PTSD or dissociative experience like
I put together a comprehensive uh
personality profile uh and it's
typically you know around a 15-page
report um that also incorporates in a
meaningful way your your history as well
so it's it's it's putting together the
history with the kind of with the
science um to to give you feedback that
you can use um moving forward so uh if
you're interested in that let me know as
well um and I do consultations with
loved ones so um yeah okay uh and those
are time limited so I meet with you
between one to three sessions for those
okay that's enough of a plug about my
practice but I do feel like there's like
resources are so limited for people out
there with these issues um I I just I
try to you know offer as many uh
different kinds of service as I can uh
and um anyway okay so again thanks for
joining me today and thanks for your
questions and I look forward to uh
seeing uh you all again next time
hopefully next month and uh stay tuned
uh sometime in the next month or so for
that video about um borderline uh NPD
all right thanks again take careforeign
[Music]
welcome to heal NPD my name is Dr Mark
eatonson I'm a licensed psychologist
specializing in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and related
issues and I'm also author of the book
unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding The Narcissist in your
life the book's a Hands-On guide to
understanding the psychology of
narcissism from a compassionate
perspective and it's available at Major
book retailers I'll put a link down in
the description
so a couple of weeks ago a friend of
mine asked me to do an episode on
malignant narcissism
and I think you see this term used a lot
on the internet but it's often used
incorrectly to some malignant narcissism
simply emphasizes uh what the person
already understands narcissism to be
it's like saying hot fire or tall
mountain
While others seem to use the term to
refer to a kind of narcissism that's
just really severe like narcissism
turned up to an 11 on the severity dial
to them malignant narcissism is like
catching a bad cold it's still
essentially a cold it's just a really
bad case of it but neither of those ways
of using the term are correct so let's
get into the concept of malignant
narcissism What It Is What It Isn't and
also what experts in the field actually
mean when they use this term
but first I think it's worth a very
brief discussion of the history behind
the term malignant narcissism was first
coined in 1964 by a German social
psychologist psychoanalyst and
philosopher Eric from
Eric Frum was a holocaust Survivor he
fled Germany during the rise of the Nazi
regime
and like many psychologists and
philosophers of his time the events of
World War II had a profound impact on
him his concept of malignant narcissism
was actually his attempt to understand
the psychology behind the toxic ambition
and Evil exhibited by dictators and
tyrants like Adolf Hitler from wrote
that in his opinion malignant narcissism
was the quintessence of human evil
and after from not much was done with
the concept for about 20 years until
Otto kernberg who's a prominent theorist
on the topic of narcissism revived the
term in his 1984 book titled severe
personality disorders
his model really shaped our
understanding of malignant narcissism as
a clinical construct that isn't
explicitly anchored in subjective
Notions of Good and Evil in this
presentation I will mainly be drawing
from kernberg's model because it's by
far the more influential when it comes
to clinical work
so according to kernberg malignant
narcissism has two proper meanings the
first is as a discrete type of
personality disorder that involves a
combination of grandiose NPD and
anti-social personality traits
the Second Use is less common and it
refers to a phase or episode in
narcissistic pathology in which
grandiose defenses that are suffused
with strong primitive aggression come to
the surface and get enacted in
relationships typically the therapy
relationship
so first let's talk about the more
common use and that's malignant
narcissism as a type of personality
disorder malignant narcissists function
at or below the borderline level of
Personality organization and if you want
to know more about what that means I did
a podcast titled is it vulnerable
narcissism or BPD that goes into greater
detail about borderline level
personality organization and I'll link
to that in the description if you're
watching this on YouTube
but basically the word borderline here
doesn't mean borderline personality
disorder instead it refers to a range of
Personality functioning that involves
moderate to severe Psychopathology
BPD actually gets its name from this
concept not the other way around
individuals in the borderline range of
Personality organization experience
moderate to severe disturbances that
create internal discontinuity
distortions of reality and porous or
blurred boundaries between the self and
other people and these disturbances
involve classic borderline level
defenses like splitting projection
projective identification denial
idealization and devaluation and acting
out they also include classic deficits
like identity diffusion feelings of
emptiness low distress tolerance
dysregulated mood and other so-called
pan-neurotic symptoms that sort of run
the gamut of moderate to severe
psychopathology
as with any personality disorder these
disturbances often stem from early
relational trauma that disrupts the
development of realistic integrated
internal models of self and others
so it's important to know that when we
use the term malignant narcissism in
this way as a type of Personality
Disorder it's not the same thing as NPD
it's not simply a severe version of
narcissism it's actually its own
distinct personality style and it
involves four Essential Elements the
first is a narcissistic personality core
the second is anti-social personality
traits the third is something called ego
syntonic sadism and the fourth is
paranoid thinking so let's go through
those uh basically what I want to
emphasize here first is that it differs
in kind not simply in degree from normal
or regular NPD
okay so because of the narcissistic
personality core malignant narcissists
are typically arrogant grandiose envious
and preoccupied with fantasies of power
Brilliance Beauty and perfection
but they also have classical anti-social
traits like lack of remorse contempt or
disregard of social conventions and um
amorality
they have no problem lying stealing
cheating or taking advantage of other
people in pursuit of their goals
now the term ego syntonic sadism means
that there's sort of a perverse pleasure
in causing harm pain or discomfort to
other people
some authors call this a conscious
ideology of aggressive self-affirmation
in which the individual feels Justified
or even in some ways elated to
dehumanize others because they perceive
them through a lens of Envy or disdain
these individuals will typically project
their unconscious feelings of weakness
or Frailty onto other people and then
sort of punish those people for those
projected qualities
they boost their own sense of well-being
of being strong or powerful at the
expense of other people
malignant narcissists also tend to have
a paranoid mistrust of others and that's
because they view them through a lens a
categorical sort of lens as either
enemies or fools or Idols in individuals
with this type of pathology the self is
extremely damaged at a very early stage
of development the ability to recognize
others as human beings with feelings of
their own is actively obliterated within
the personality at an unconscious level
and instead the individual's own needs
feelings and impulses are projected onto
everyone around them they essentially
live in a world that's populated only by
their own projections because they're
unable to sort of see anyone else as a
separate Center of subjective experience
so let's get into why this happens and
again uh this is what I'm about to
describe here is highly theoretical
but you know you may be wondering why
would some individuals develop the
regular version of pathological
narcissism While others develop
malignant narcissism
so as I said earlier
Otto kernberg is one of the most
prominent and influential theorists on
the topic of NPD he uses a theory called
object relations which is a
psychoanalytic model of how we develop
internal images of the self and of other
people
and according to kernberg NPD is the
result and this is regular NPD now it's
the result of a pathological Fusion
between parts of the personality in
defense against something called
primitive aggression
now the term primitive comes up quite
often in psychoanalytic models of
personality disorders and although it
may conjure up images of cavemen the
term is actually referring to defenses
and feelings that are thought to occur
very early in infancy or childhood think
prior to Age Two
uh and this is when feelings of Rage
shame dependency or Terror caused the
child's developing psyche to fragment on
an almost daily basis
so to illustrate try to remember the
last time you screamed or cried the way
a baby does
for most adults such anguish occurs very
rarely because we've developed defenses
to hold ourselves and our grip on
reality together
most adults don't completely fall apart
outside of exceptional circumstances but
young children completely fall apart all
the time when they don't get an ice
cream cone or when they have a wet
diaper basically anytime something
uncomfortable occurs
now psychologists use the term primitive
to describe these experiences because
they haven't been refined or moderated
by more mature psychological defenses
part of the Psychopathology of
personality disorders is that the
individual has not developed reliable
defenses to help mitigate these
so-called primitive feelings and
impulses
they distort reality split off parts of
the self or project unwanted feelings
and self-images onto others and this is
because of relational trauma that
disrupted the development of more mature
realistic and integrated images of the
self and other people
okay so kernberg wrote that NPD is the
result of pathological Fusion between
parts of the personality in defense
against primitive aggression essentially
the individual is defensively organized
in such a way as to minimize dependency
on unreliable exploitative or cruel
caregivers who cause the child to
experience chronic frustration and
overwhelming aggression
now remember young children don't have
mature defenses to keep things in
perspective when frustration and
overwhelming anger occur on a frequent
basis the developing child is forced to
sort of reorganize their internal world
to protect their ability to rely on
caregivers who are hurting them
uh so they create a self-structure that
sort of short circuits dependency and
this self-structure is called a
grandiose self kernberg writes at this
point there is Fusion of Ideal self
ideal object and actual self images as a
defense against an intolerable reality
in the interpersonal Realm in their
fantasies these patients identify
themselves with their own ideal
self-images in order to deny dependency
on external objects basically if you're
already perfect then you don't need
anything and if you don't need anything
then you're not subject to the
overwhelming primitive anger and
aggression that comes up when your needs
are being actively and chronically
denied by caregivers so krenberg is
saying that the child fuses together
their ideal self-image their fantasy of
an ideal or perfect caregiver and their
actual self-image their sense of who
they really are into a pathological
grandiose self
he writes it's as if they were saying I
don't need to fear that I will be
rejected that ideal person and my ideal
image of that person and my real self
are all one and I don't need anyone else
anymore
dependency needs and Associated feelings
that threaten the grandiose self are
split off and repressed by the child to
become self-sufficient and that's
because depending on their caregivers to
meet their emotional needs is too
dangerous at this point feelings of
inadequacy of Rage of dependency and of
primitive anger or aggression they're
split off and they're driven down into
the unconscious
kernberg writes at the bottom lies a
still deeper image of the relationship
with external objects it's the image of
a hungry enraged empty self full of
anger and fearful of a world that seems
as hateful and revengeful as the patient
himself
so to summarize in kernberg's model of
regular NPD the child rearranges parts
of the self in order to defend against
overwhelming anger and primitive
aggression
they figure out a way to in fantasy
become self-sufficient and quote perfect
in order to keep their world from being
overrun by feelings of hate for the very
people they're supposed to love and on
whom they are forced to depend
now the key here is that the grandiose
self is created to protect the child and
their caregivers from the child's own
overwhelming anger and aggression
and this is where malignant narcissism
is different
in malignant narcissism the grandiose
self becomes overrun by the Primitive
aggression it is created to defend
against
the aggression becomes a part of the ego
syntonic experience of self it isn't
disowned repressed or split off
kernberg writes that in contrast to
ordinary narcissistic personality these
patients malignant narcissists
experienced increased self-esteem and
confirmation of the grandiosity when
they can express aggression toward
themselves or other people
and he speculates that there are four
factors that are typically present in
the early childhood of malignant
narcissists
first they experience caregivers as both
omnipotent and sadistic or cruel there's
no psychic escape from the omnipotent
and cruel caregiver who dominates all
aspects of the child's early experience
second the ever-presence of the cruel or
in other words sadistic and omnipotent
caregiver creates a sense in the
developing child that having good loving
or mutually gratifying relationships is
impossible
third the child develops a sense that
total submission to the cruel caregiver
is the only condition for survival
they essentially abandoned the search
for good objects and relationships
instead allowing their developing sense
of self to be overrun by identifications
with the sadistic caregiver who becomes
a part of the child's personality in the
form of something called an interject
and fourth once this identification with
the sadistic or cruel caregiver is
complete a sense of power and Freedom
From Pain fear or dread is experienced
by the child
the child has become the cruel object
that was formally feared and therefore
there's no more need for fear
so in kramberg's model malignant
narcissists are forced to make a
compromise very early in their
psychological development in the face of
a powerful and sadistic caregiver the
child abandons the search for good
objects and a grandiose self is formed
just like in regular narcissism but
unlike in regular narcissism that
self-structure becomes fused with
identifications with the sadistic
caregiver
the malignant narcissist wins Freedom
through submission allowing the
expression of anger hate cruelty and
express and aggression to become the
dominant mode through which connection
with other people is achieved
the grandiose self of malignant
narcissists is propped up by aggression
it collapses in the absence of it
attempts to reach the vulnerable parts
of the individual are actually
experienced by the individual as a
direct assault on the person's core
sense of self and they're met with
immediate cruelty that also serves to
prop up the grandiose self through
identifications with the sadistic object
or caregiver
and this is why sadism and malignant
narcissism is ego syntonic or
experienced as sort of in alignment with
the self and it's also why paranoia is
often present the individual grew up
experiencing constant attacks by the
person or people who were supposed to
care for them the anti-social aspects of
malignant narcissism like lack of
remorse are due to the person's denial
of their own humanity and vulnerability
how can they recognize in other people
what they've sort of abandoned or refuse
or refuse to recognize in themselves
so to illustrate how this personality
type might look the evil queen from Snow
White or the evil stepmother from
Cinderella provide good if exaggerated
prototypical examples these characters
are aloof they're cold arrogant and
they're obsessed with power and vanity
the attempt to humiliate psychologically
destroy or even kill those around them
in pursuit of their own
self-aggrandizement and they experience
No Remorse in the process they inhabit a
psychological landscape that's split
into that which is theirs and therefore
perfect and that which threatens their
status and must therefore be destroyed
okay so that was the first use of the
term malignant narcissism according to
Otto kernberg as a separate personality
disorder that involves aspects of
narcissism anti-social Behavior ego
syntonic sadism and paranoia
the second use of the term is much less
common
so in addition to malignant narcissists
as a type of Personality Disorder
kernberg also recognized that periods of
malignant narcissism may be encountered
in the treatment of regular NPD and
that's due to the difficulty of
resolving the pathological grandiose
self
now remember in kernberg's model the
grandiose self is a fusion of the ideal
self ideal images of others and the
actual self and part of the work of
treatment is to kind of defuse this
structure which then exposes the patient
to the repressed and split off rage
anger shame and aggression that the
grandiose self was created to defend
against in the first place as these
defenses start to loosen the patient may
also be exposed to underlying
identifications with cruel or sadistic
objects internalized images of
caregivers that have become a part of
the personality at an unconscious level
and when these identifications are
threatened by the therapist's kindness
positive regard or sensitivity to the
patient's feelings the patient may begin
to psychologically attack the therapist
and it seems paradoxical that this would
happen but you have to remember that
um the therapist is is disrupting the
status quo the therapist is Awakening
long repressed dependency longings
within the patient and Associated
primitive anger and aggression at never
having had those those emotional needs
met in the first place
the personality sometimes rallies in
defense of the patient deploying the
same tactics that were used against the
patient when they were very young
warmth is met with coldness sensitivity
is met with cruelty and positive regard
is met with derision or devaluation
these so-called malignancies are the
product of an unconscious identification
with the cruel or sadistic caregiver and
they have to be worked through patiently
in the therapy in order to help the
patient let go of those defenses and
open the door to new possibilities
so I guess the take-home Point here
would be that malignant narcissism is
not the same thing as regular NPD
most of our media representations of NPD
are actually of malignant narcissists
which is why they seem so scary
malignant narcissism is actually very
challenging to treat and that's due to
the anti-social sadistic and paranoid
components that are present malignant
narcissists also rarely enter treatment
voluntarily
while people with a sort of regular
pathological narcissism and NPD
periodically or chronically experience a
collapse of their grandiose defenses and
they kind of fall into a vulnerable
expression of the disorder malignant
narcissists don't collapse in the same
way they actively defend against such
Collapse by externalizing any feelings
of weakness or vulnerability and then
behaving cruelly toward other people
um sadistic or cruel treatment of others
in malignant narcissism provides a
feeling of Freedom From Pain fear or
distress and and this is a very
difficult defense to modify in treatment
of patients of this sort should probably
focus more on harm reduction and helping
the patient to find more adaptive ways
of coping rather than attempting to
modify underlying personality structures
so if you're listening to this and
identify with some of these descriptions
of malignant narcissism remember that
I'm describing a theoretical construct
here and that such constructs
necessarily collapse you know complex
Dynamics into simplified models for the
purpose of explanation each of us is far
more complex than any label or diagnosis
but if you do feel that some of these
descriptions match your experience of
yourself then take it seriously seek out
treatment with a qualified mental health
professional none of us is responsible
for the events that shaped our
personality but we are responsible for
what we do about it the better you come
to know yourself the more empowered you
become to make better decisions
okay so that's it for today as always
leave comments questions or suggestions
for future episodes down below and until
next time take good care
[Music]
thank you[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a clinical
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of pathological narcissism and
related disorders i'm also the author of
the book unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding the narcissist in your
life
and today i'd like to talk a little bit
about the self
essentially pathological narcissism is a
disorder of the self and i'd like to
talk about what that means
the branch of psychology that studies
narcissism is called self psychology
but the concept of a self
is a little difficult to pin down
it's a fluid concept
and when i teach this concept to my
students i ask them to close their eyes
and to think about the experience of
being a self
i ask them what does it feel like to be
you what are the experiences the
memories the affiliations that are
important in your feeling of being a
self
what are the boundaries of that
experience
and i ask them if inside of it
they can find the echoes of important
figures from their past
perhaps their mother father
cherished friends or romantic partners
i asked them if they can find ideas and
concepts
that were important in defining who they
are and what they believe
the longer we look at it
the more apparent it becomes that the
self is highly variable
there seems to be some aspects of it
that remain constant
but there are also some that change
depending on our mental state
heinz kohut was the founder of
self-psychology and he wrote that in
certain psychological states the self
may expand far beyond the borders of the
individual
patriotism is a good example of this
when we have a strong feeling that we're
part of something that extends far
beyond the boundaries of our own skin
but the self may also shrink to become
identical with a single thought feeling
or action
and if you imagine being so embarrassed
by something you've done that you feel
you'll never live it down
in that mental state your experience of
being a self becomes very small
for that brief period of time you in a
sense become your mistake
you become
your feeling of embarrassment
falling in love can have a similar
effect
the self expands and it contracts
and this is especially true when we're
very young and the boundaries of the
self are not yet well established
as it turns out the ways that we're
treated by others
have tremendous impact on our
self-development
those experiences shape and inform how
it feels to be you
empathy and affiliation are the main
building blocks of a healthy self
and for people who were raised in a
positive responsive environment where
they felt they belonged and it felt
consistently seen and understood the
experience of selfhood is mostly
positive
it's mostly well defined and organized
there tend not to be huge distortions in
self-concept
there aren't pieces of the self that
don't fit together well
um or hair trigger reactions to everyday
events like making a mistake or
receiving a small amount of criticism
but not everyone is so lucky
for those who were raised in an
emotionally impoverished neglectful or
abusive environment the self can be
damaged
it may be full of conflict or feelings
of frustration rage shame alienation or
humiliation
and sometimes such feelings are laid
down so early that they become a core
aspect of the self
making it very difficult to feel good
about being you
and they interfere
with attempts to form close
relationships
in response the person might try to
build new parts of the self that aren't
sort of contaminated by those
problematic core feelings and when this
happens we call it the false self
and since the false self is often built
as a defense
against those underlying problematic
feelings it often has a quality of
grandiosity it's as if the person
unconsciously decided that no they're
not broken they're perfect
they aren't in desperate need of love
and understanding they're completely
self-sufficient
because the false self is built on top
of the damaged core
there's a lack of cohesion within the
individual
it's like mismatched puzzle pieces
jammed together
or
being inside of a home that has clashing
and mismatched interior decorating the
experience of moving between rooms in
such a home feels disjointed
it lacks a coherent theme or flow
between spaces
these sorts of structural issues within
the self are actually the cause of
pathological narcissism
the foundations of selfhood are laid
when we're very young but the process of
building and maintaining the self goes
on throughout our lives
we use something called self-object
experiences as the glue that holds the
self together
self objects are sort of like the pieces
of your world that help define your
experience of being a self
and when you're very young
the main self objects were your parents
your caregivers siblings and other
members of your household but later
that self-object pool expanded to
include friends teachers
favorite sports teams or even characters
on television and in movies
i can remember being a kid and wanting
to be indiana jones and superman
as we grow
we require less and less from our
self-objects
infants need constant care and
responsiveness
to keep their sense of being a self
organized and positive
but by the time we're adults most of us
have created largely symbolic self
objects
we're americans or we're democrats or
republicans we're fans of the raiders or
the yankees
we also form self-object relationships
with spouses partners families and
employers and those relationships tend
to be defined by an equal or at least
reciprocal amount of give and take
but for individuals who have a
compromised self the need for highly
responsive and positive self-object
experiences remains very high even into
adulthood
the unstable self needs a kind of heavy
duty glue to hold it together to keep it
from fragmenting or falling apart
and the problems in the self compel the
person to seek constant reassurance from
others
typically in the form of positive regard
but individuals with severely
compromised selves may need more than
just positive regard they may actually
need to feel idealized and since
affiliation is also one of the main
building blocks of selfhood they may in
turn idealize others and use their
affiliation with those people to shore
up their own feeling of being good
enough
since the false self is built on top of
underlying core feelings of shame rage
or alienation
individuals with pathological narcissism
tend to fluctuate between periods of
grandiosity when the self is experienced
as unrealistically positive to periods
of intense shame anxiety or even
depression
when the underlying problems in the self
become exposed
sometimes the self is experienced as
empty
an extremely dysphoric state that often
compels the narcissistic individual
to abuse substances or engage in other
maladaptive behaviors in an attempt to
fill themselves up
we call these negative experiences
narcissistic vulnerability
they can also include things like
internal disorganization lack of
cohesion extreme discontinuities and
self-experience intrusive feelings or
associations feelings of worthlessness
self-directed rage and severe
distortions in the perception of the
self and also of other people
now it's often been observed that the
stereotype of the overconfident
narcissist who's in love with themselves
is largely a myth
such individuals do exist but to be
truly narcissistic their behavior must
be motivated by an underlying deficit in
the self
pathological narcissism is actually
about deficits and disabilities
grandiosity is about the person's
attempt to compensate for those deficits
and disabilities it's a symptom
and just like any other symptom of a
mental illness to truly comprehend it we
need to understand what's happening
underneath
it's also important to remember that
pathological narcissism is actually a
treatable issue
the person needs to want help and they
need to be willing to commit to the
process but the self can be healed
so don't give up hope
when working with narcissistic patients
we often begin by trying to make space
for their vulnerable feelings
noticing together whatever comes up
around those
these are the parts of the patient that
need acceptance and validation
okay well thanks for joining me today
please reach out with questions or
suggestions for future topics and until
next time take good care
[Music]
youhi everyone my name is Dr Mark eatonson
welcome to heal NPD
many of the issues in pathological
narcissism and NPD involve difficulty
perceiving the difference between self
and other in short narcissists struggle
with boundaries but they aren't the only
ones many of the comments that I receive
on this channel are from individuals who
have been in dysfunctional or abusive
relationships and who have struggled to
set and maintain adaptive boundaries so
today's episode is for both sides of the
aisle I'll be providing a definition of
interpersonal boundaries I'll be
discussing the reasons why boundaries
are important for mental health and for
healthy relationships I'll be discussing
the problems with boundaries that often
occur in pathological narcissism and
I'll be providing some basic tips for
assertive Behavior so let's get started
[Music]
the ability to set and maintain adaptive
boundaries is a foundational skill and a
central issue in all relationships
including those that involve
pathological narcissism
boundaries allow us to communicate
effectively to get our needs met and to
protect ourselves from mistreatment and
from abuse but what is a boundary simply
put a boundary is a limit set by you or
by someone else that protects something
of value
imagine for a moment what would happen
if your home didn't have a front door it
wouldn't take long before the intrusion
of weather bugs animals and even other
people would make your space unlivable
your home's front door is a barrier it's
a limit it's a boundary that protects
you and your belongings it's what allows
you to have things of value
nothing functions without boundaries
your home needs a door your body needs
skin your nation needs laws and your
relationships need rules mutually agreed
upon limits concerning what is
permissible and what is not
we are each entitled to set limits that
feel good to us and that reflect our
personal boundaries some simple examples
might include the right not to have our
bodies touched without our consent the
right not to be spoken to in an abusive
or a demeaning Manner and the right to
manage our own friendships and finances
when discussing boundaries I'm sometimes
reminded of Goldilocks and the Three
Bears in that tale Goldilocks encounters
three versions of everything in the
Bear's home one version is too small too
soft or too cold one version is too
large too hard or too hot and one
version is just right
like the things in the Bear's home
boundaries often come in three versions
two porous too inflexible and just right
porous boundaries are like a door that
doesn't close all the way or one that
doesn't lock the barrier between inside
and outside is too permeable
those with porous boundaries may not
feel entitled to a private space in
their lives they may feel conflicted
about setting and enforcing limits on
loved ones behaviors they may allow
themselves to be taken for granted taken
advantage of manipulated or controlled
by someone else they may allow someone
else to control their finances dictate
who they can be friends with or to
dismiss and devalue their thoughts and
feelings sometimes people with porous
boundaries transgress on the boundaries
of other people as well they may feel
entitled to all of a person's time or
attention they may think it's okay to
invade their partner's personal or
private space or they may Place demands
on a partner to reveal every single
thought inside that person's head they
may not respect locked or closed doors
they may secretly go through their
partner's phone or social media accounts
and they may reveal intimate details
about a partner to friends or co-workers
without that person's consent
basically people with porous boundaries
are unable to protect what's important
and they make it difficult or impossible
for others to protect what's important
to them
now in contrast to porous boundaries
inflexible boundaries can also be
problematic they're like a door with
five deadbolts and an armed guard
healthy relationships involve compromise
and negotiation from all involved
parties if one person is unwilling or
unable to make reasonable compromises
then it places an unfair burden on the
other person or persons to make more
than their fair share of compromises to
compensate examples of inflexible
boundaries might include rigid ideas
about cleanliness unwillingness to allow
spontaneity the tendency to take things
personally and to hold grudges being too
quick to cut people out of your life
expecting that everyone will just
magically know and adjust to your
personal preferences and attempting to
control what others do say think or feel
inflexible interpersonal boundaries can
also look like an inability or an
unwillingness to get close to other
people emotionally
inflexible boundaries keep too much of
the world out of your home the air gets
stale you begin to run out of food the
utilities are gradually shut off you
protect what's important but it comes at
the cost of physical mental or emotional
health
as in the story of Goldilocks there is a
level of boundaries that is just right
we call these adaptive boundaries and
they're anchored in your personal values
but they also respect the values of
other people
adaptive boundaries consist of a
combination of strength and flexibility
they're firmly rooted in the rights and
the values of the individual they can
withstand heavy stress and strain but
they're also flexible enough to adapt to
the given situation and they can be
moved when appropriate
okay so that's a primer on the concept
of boundaries and why they're important
as I've discussed in previous episodes
individuals with pathological narcissism
and NPD have difficulty recognizing and
respecting the boundaries of other
people pathological narcissism involves
deficits in self-image that require the
individual to seek out external
infusions of self-esteem
and this process requires a constant
breaking down of personal and
psychological boundaries
if someone is trying to take something
inside of you and use it to sustain
something inside of them that is by
definition a boundaryless process but
the lack of boundaries in pathological
narcissism and NPD is often much more
profound involving a fundamental absence
of differentiation between self and
others this absence of a differentiated
self is due to developmental deficits
that extend back into childhood when
we're first forming a separate identity
psychologically it's thought that
infants rely on a feeling of merger with
caregivers to sustain their fragile
experience of self they need to be
suspended in a kind of ongoing reverie
of psychological and emotional Oneness
or Unity with caregivers that helps to
ameliorate the lack of internal cohesion
and terrifying self-states that are
thought to dominate the first years of
life
the analyst Donald winnicott called this
suspended reverie going on being
winnicott thought that young children
must be allowed to fully soak up this
subjective merger with caregivers before
they could begin to emerge as a separate
psychological being
in winnicott's model successful
emergence as a separate self was only
possible if the child had accumulated
good enough experience that makes being
a separate self tolerable
Margaret Mahler termed this process of
emerging as a separate self
individuation
individuation is the process of
separating psychologically from
caregivers it involves building an
identity that is yours that's based on
your personal experience and a sense of
an inner world that is bounded and
separate from the inner worlds of those
around you for children who have had
good enough experience that is who have
felt adequately supported and cared for
adequately seen and understood
adequately held and suspended both
physically and emotionally in Blissful
merger with caregivers and who have been
allowed to emerge from that reverie at
an organic and natural pace the process
of individuating or separating
psychologically can be one of increasing
competence confidence and pride in the
discovery of One's Own abilities however
a lot can go wrong on the path to
forming a separate self the nascent self
is fragile and wobbly when it first
begins to individuate it's easily
overwhelmed and easily frustrated it's
full of unrealistic expectations about
itself and it's subject to polarized
self-images that are either all good or
all bad young children may expect
themselves to be perfect they may have
totally unrealistic ideas about their
own capabilities or they may vacillate
between grandiose self-experience and
utter loss of self
we must gradually develop a self-image
that is flexible stable and realistic we
do this during a period of development
called the reproachma subphase
Margaret Mahler first identified this
sub-phase of individuation and she
noticed that young children would
blissfully run away from their
caregivers when they went to play
delighting in their independence and
their developing capabilities however at
some point they would begin to turn back
just to make sure that their caregiver
was still available to help them if
needed
Mauler conjectured that this reassurance
seeking had profound developmental
implications
children in this phase exist in a state
of hyperpermeable boundaries they seek
Independence in individuation but they
still rely on the safety of a caregiver
to sustain their sort of wobbly
self-image
the world is a big and a scary place and
they've begun to come up against their
own physical emotional and mental
limitations
being able to access their caregivers
strength positivity and encouragement
allows them to continue on the path
toward independent selfhood in mahler's
model some individuals get stuck in the
reproachment subphase of individuation
they remain suspended between emerged
self and a separate self
and this level of object relations is
sometimes referred to as the borderline
range of functioning which is different
by the way than borderline personality
disorder
individuals in the borderline range of
functioning struggle with boundaries
they have extreme difficulty generating
stable moderate and realistic images of
themselves and of other people like the
children in mahler's studies they seek
Independence but quickly become
overwhelmed
their images of self and others are
often polarized into categories of
perfection and worthlessness they often
send mixed messages that reflect deep
ambivalence about being a separate self
they may fluctuate between states of
essential boundarylessness where they
seem to seek complete merger with other
people and states of extreme or even
forceful separation where they seem to
hate other people and view them as
intrusive or controlling
individuals in this range of function
are also frequently confused about their
feelings and intentions the self is not
developed enough at this stage to
tolerate its own internal contradictions
so it relies instead on reality
distorting defenses like splitting or
denial the underdeveloped or damaged
self is also not able to tolerate making
mistakes or being wrong due to internal
polarizations
if the self isn't perfect then it must
be worthless and if it's worthless then
what is the point of even being a self
in the first place
these lines of thought cause collapse
into depression anxiety hopelessness
shame and even suicidality there's also
often a tendency to experience very
powerful emotions that quickly overwhelm
The Fragile self and sort of spill over
onto and even into other people this is
called projection and projective
identification
now individuals in the borderline range
of functioning rely on these and other
defenses because they blur the line
between self and other allowing them to
disown thoughts and feelings that their
fragile self-structure can't tolerate
but the permeable boundaries that allow
projection also allow something called
introjection which is where the thoughts
feelings and perceptions of other people
are experienced as coming from inside
the self and this is the mechanism that
enables self-object experiences
individuals in the borderline range are
able to soak up the ways that other
people regard them as though those
feelings were generated by their own
self if they feel idealized it's as
though they were generating the
perception themselves individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD rely on
this phenomenon to generate self-esteem
however just as they can sort of soak up
positive idealizing feelings about the
self they can also soak up negative
feelings and this results in a kind kind
of hypersensitivity to shame and
humiliation and this is why people with
NPD seem so sensitive to the slightest
negative perception about themselves
such perceptions are not experienced as
the mere opinions of other people their
experience as facts about the self that
must be fought with neutralized or
expelled now it's important to remember
that these issues with boundaries affect
anyone organized at the borderline level
that includes people with NPD but also
people with other personality disorders
like borderline personality disorder
dependent personality disorder paranoid
personality disorder and
obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder as well as others this is why
there appear to be so many commonalities
between all of these disorders they all
involve functioning in the borderline
range with a separation of self and
others is incomplete and boundaries are
hyperpermeable
different personality Styles will cope
with these issues in different ways
paranoid personalities rely more heavily
on projection and externalization
individuals with BPD struggle more with
issues pertaining to merger and
separation while individuals with NPD
struggle more with maintaining a stable
positive and realistic self-image but
all utilize common borderline level
defenses like projection projective
identification denial splitting and
acting out the main differences have to
do with the core schemas around which
these issues tend to occur NPD should
not be synonymous with abuse violence or
evil someone with NPD can certainly do
those things they can certainly behave
in harmful or abusive ways toward other
people
but that in no way represents the heart
of the disorder
the heart of NPD is an unstable
self-image and deficits in coping with
the issues that are caused by having an
unstable self-image in the borderline
range of functioning those ways of
coping involve a constant Erasure of
boundaries in the pursuit of reassurance
just like the young child looking over
their shoulder to make sure their
caregiver is still there still watching
still believing in them and their
abilities individuals with NPD are
constantly seeking external infusions of
self-esteem and periodic return to
unindividuated states with those around
them in which the other person's
positive regard can become the
narcissist's positive regard now all
that being said boundary erasing can
have really negative consequences
the pressure to prop up the fragile self
and defend it against perceived threats
whether internal or external can cause
people with NPD to engage in controlling
Behavior devaluing behavior and at times
cruel or even abusive Behavior no one
should tolerate mistreatment or abuse
it's incumbent upon each of us to set
and maintain our own boundaries
each of us is entitled to decide how we
want to be treated we're entitled to ask
for that treatment and we're entitled to
leave when someone refuses to treat us
in the ways that we want to be treated
I used to run a therapy group that
discussed boundaries and assertiveness
and people would come in so confused
about what constitutes an effective
boundary how to communicate about their
boundaries and how to be assertive when
their boundaries were crossed so here's
what I would tell them
first what's an effective boundary an
effective boundary is one that you can
State simply and clearly examples
include things like I don't want to be
yelled at I don't want to be touched
like that
want to be treated with kindness and
respect
importantly your right to set a boundary
ends where another person's rights begin
you're not entitled to control anyone
else's Behavior you're not entitled to
make anyone feel a certain way about you
you're not entitled to touch anyone
else's body or control their movements
interests friends or beliefs
two how should you communicate your
boundaries well there's no perfect way
to communicate boundaries different
people respond differently to different
communication Styles it's not on you to
quote make anyone understand your
boundaries you can't make anyone else
respect your boundaries all you can do
is State your boundaries as clearly and
unapologetically as possible
and then be willing to follow through to
protect them
if someone crosses a boundary you get to
decide what you will do about it maybe
you give a warning maybe you decide to
leave the relationship and never look
back maybe you decide to involve the
authorities it's up to you you can't
force people to respect your boundaries
but you can absolutely follow through in
protecting them your ability to protect
your boundaries ends where another
person's rights begin
physically or emotionally harming
someone because they crossed a boundary
is not protecting your boundary it's
violating theirs if someone is hurting
you get help leave the situation and
then take necessary steps to protect
yourself in the future
three how to be assertive like
boundaries assertiveness ranges from too
little to too much
too little assertiveness is called
passive Behavior too much assertiveness
is called aggressive behavior the
easiest way to think about assertiveness
is to think about rights each of us has
rights and those rights typically extend
to the boundaries of our skin and
sometimes beyond for example when it
comes to property or dependence for whom
we have legal responsibility
passive behavior is when you allow
someone to violate your rights examples
might include not speaking up for
yourself or your needs because you're
afraid of offending or disappointing
someone
now on the other end of the spectrum
aggressive behavior involves protecting
your rights while violating the rights
of someone else examples might include
verbally berating or physically
assaulting someone because they offended
you invading someone else's space
because you want more for yourself
Etc
now right in the middle between passive
and aggressive behavior is where we find
assertiveness assertiveness prioritizes
both your rights and the rights of the
other person examples of assertive
Behavior include you know politely but
firmly informing the server at a
restaurant that your order is incorrect
kindly but firmly asking someone to
lower their voice when speaking to you
or respectfully declining an invitation
that you don't wish to attend now the
beautiful thing about assertiveness is
that you never have to quote win a fight
or argument you never have to be proven
right you don't have to somehow get the
other person to agree with you all you
have to do is State your boundary and be
willing to follow through if the other
person doesn't respect it
perhaps that involves asking to speak to
the manager if your server refuses to
fix their mistake
it might involve excusing yourself from
a conversation if the person refuses to
lower their voice it could also involve
more extreme responses you get to decide
what's appropriate and so long as you
respect the rights of those around you
you can't go wrong don't like the way a
partner treats you tell them in a firm
but respectful way and if they don't
listen you can leave you can call a
friend for support you can call the
police for help no one is entitled to
force you to be in a relationship in
which you're unhappy and if they're
attempting to do so then you need to
find help assertiveness often looks like
seeking support engaging in self-care
asking for what you want or need and
walking away when the other person
decides not to respect your request
assertiveness almost never looks like
arguing fighting hitting manipulating
coercing taking or hurting someone in
any way if you're confused about
assertive Behavior boundaries or your
rights then you need to seek support
call your friend talk to a therapist
speak to a lawyer consult with your
doctor go to the police no one should
construe anything I'm saying in this or
any other episode as an appeal to remain
in a situation or a relationship in
which you are unhappy or you're being
mistreated
when I talk about having compassion for
people with pathological narcissism and
NPD I'm talking to Society at large to
the public and to mental health
professionals and online personalities
who make a living spreading stigma and
selling scandalizing representations of
this particular form of mental illness
I'm never talking to individuals in
personal relationships with someone who
is harming or mistreating them I simply
can't say that clearly enough if anyone
is hurting you you should absolutely 100
percent seek support
if you're someone who identifies as
struggling with pathological narcissism
or NPD moving toward greater Health
means developing a more stable realistic
and positive self-image it means
progressively learning to tolerate the
distortions and self-perception that
characterize these issues without
relying so much on disruptive or
maladaptive ways of coping working to
more reliably see the separation between
self and others is a great way to
practice all of these skills
in my previous video on narcissistic
rage I discussed not taking things
personally
recognize that other people are their
own centers of emotional gravity and
their thoughts feelings and behaviors
have almost everything to do with them
and almost nothing to do with you
well the same goes for you you are your
own being your own self
take ownership of the deficits inside of
yourself that cause you to struggle with
self-esteem
recognize that these deficits reside in
you and that no one else is obligated to
help you with them in any way
practice asking for reassurance and
emotional support in ways that are not
boundary Crossing don't pressure or
coerce anyone to help you with your
insecurities just ask if they're busy or
unable to do so then you might need to
try something else
see if you can find something that is
inherently non-destructive and that
involves treating yourself and other
people with kindness and respect take a
long walk write in a journal express
yourself through ART lose yourself in a
game or a movie enjoy a special treat or
dinner scream into a pillow go to the
gym see if you can find a way to make
space for your internal experience
however upsetting or distressing it
might be without trying to get rid of it
externalize it or take it out on
yourself or anyone else
you are a separate self
you're flawed and imperfect
just like the rest of us you're one of
more than eight billion such selves on
planet Earth and there's no requirement
that you be anything more than exactly
who you are in this exact moment feeling
whatever you feel
you're separate yes
but you're not alone
okay so that's it for today as always
leave comments questions or suggestions
for future episodes and if you leave a
comment try to be respectful one of the
focuses of this episode is tolerating
distressed states of mind and holding
unwanted feelings without abusing other
people and that applies to everyone not
just those who struggle with
pathological narcissism
and until next time take good care
[Music]the only real solution is treatment the
therapist and patient together must
weather these storms of grandiosity and
collapse during periods of grandiosity
the therapist must find ways to hold
onto the reality of the patient's
vulnerability and during periods of
vulnerability the therapist must find
ways to hold the patient hope the goal
is integration to forge a more stable
realistic coherent self-image that is
well defined and better able to tolerate
and Ain the core conflicts that Define
the narcissistic personality Stylethe Repro subphase occurs around Age Two
and during this time young children want
autonomy but fear abandonment it's a
time that's marked by extreme power
struggles pushes toward Independence and
pulls for closeness successfully
navigating this period requires a lot
from caregivers patience flexibility
firm boundaries clear communication
warmth and the ability to tolerate being
raged at by someone who also needs you
desperatelyall pathological narcissists fluctuate
between periods of grandiosity and
vulnerability the guy who seems
completely full of himself and like he
has an unrealistically positive
self-image likely goes through private
periods of breakdown and vulnerability
the same goes for the quietly depressed
narcissist who has an unrealistically
negative self-image that person likely
goes through intense periods of
grandiosity and inflated self-esteemso here's the definition of narcissism
as a mental illness something we call
pathological narcissism it's defined as
difficulty maintaining a positive
realistic self-image accompanied by
deficits and effective coping when
threats to self-image are encountered
it's defined by
deficits deficits in self-image deficits
in coping deficits in Social functioning
and awarenessthis is when a person grossly Alters or
reshapes internal or external reality
for example I once got into a minor
verbal conflict with a man at a dog park
he had parked very close to my car and
as a result I wasn't able to open my
door after getting out the passenger
side I asked him to please move his car
which caused him to become visibly
agitated now I wasn't doing anything
threatening but clearly he felt
threatened by the mere fact of my
frustration out of the
he said you know what happens if you hit
me right I was taken aback because I
hadn't threatened to hit him I just
wanted him to move his car but the look
in his eye made me feel like I'd somehow
been abusing him for years even though
we'd never met then he pointed to the
dog sitting in his car and he spat he'll
rip your throat
out now this exchange was deeply
disturbing to me the man's reaction was
not reality based nothing about what was
happening happening would suggest to a
reasonable person that they were in any
sort of danger or that it would be
appropriate to say that their dog was
going to rip my throat out I could only
assume that in his mind I somehow
represented a grave threat to his
physical safety I became a concrete
representation of his internal fear and
apprehensionPsychotic fragmentation. This is when
self-image, object images, and the links
between them become fragmented. Such
fragmentation produces a disorganized
and confused narrative. It involves
total splitting between multiple self
states, fracturing the person into
countless pieces that can't be easily
linked together. Someone utilizing this
defense may appear to ramble
incoherently, to vacasillate between
sudden and frighteningly intense
feelings and perceptions, or to
construct narratives that seem to
contain numerous conflicting organizing
themes.foreign
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is Dr Mark eatonson I'm a
specialist in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and related
issues and also author of the book
unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding The Narcissist in your
life the book is a Hands-On guide to
understanding the psychology of
narcissism from a compassionate
perspective and it's available at Major
book retailers
so today I'd like to discuss resiliency
you know normally when we talk about
mental illness and particularly
personality disorders like NPD we focus
exclusively on what's going wrong we
talk about deficits you know what's
missing in the person's psychology and
we talk about pathologies in other words
what's present but disordered or
maladaptive we rarely focus on the
positives we seldom discuss personality
disorders in terms of resiliency
and I think that does a disservice to
individuals who struggle with these
issues because each individual
psychology is actually a story of
resiliency and I think it's important to
talk about those resiliencies to
understand and appreciate how the person
made the best of a bad situation
how they learn through trial and error
to take care of themselves and make up
for what was missing in their early care
environment how they developed defenses
to survive abuse how they grew and
persisted despite adversity or neglect
maladaptive traits in a personality are
often the individual's best attempt to
adapt and overcome
to survive emotionally and
psychologically
and this is one of the things that I
find so compelling about human
psychology and really about living
things in general to quote the character
of Ian Malcolm from the movie Jurassic
Park
life finds a way
now when I was applying to graduate
school a quote by the American
psychologist Carl Rogers was very
helpful to me in defining my perspective
on human psychology I'm going to read it
in its entirety here because I think he
says it much better than I ever could
whether we're speaking of a flower or an
oak tree of an earthworm or a beautiful
bird of an ape or a person
we will do well I believe to recognize
that life is an active process not a
passive one
whether the stimulus arises from within
or without
whether the environment is favorable or
unfavorable
the behaviors of an organism can be
counted on to be in the direction of
maintaining enhancing and reproducing
itself
this is the very nature of the process
we call life
this tendency is operative at all times
indeed only the presence or absence of
this total directional process enables
us to tell whether a given organism is
alive or dead the actualizing tendency
can of course be thwarted or warped but
it cannot be destroyed without
destroying the organism
I remember that in my Boyhood the bin in
which we stored our winter supply of
potatoes was in the basement several
feet below a small window
the conditions were unfavorable
but the potatoes would begin to sprout
pale white Sprouts so unlike the Healthy
Green shoots they send up when planted
in the soil in the spring
but these sad spindly Sprouts would grow
two or three feet in length as they
reached toward the distant light of the
window
the Sprouts were in their bizarre futile
growth a sort of desperate expression of
the directional tendency I have been
describing
they would never become plants never
mature never fulfill their real
potential but under the most adverse
circumstances they were striving to
become
life would not give up even if it could
not flourish in dealing with clients
whose lives have been terribly warped in
working with men and women on the back
Wards of State hospitals I often think
of those potato Sprouts so unfavorable
have been the conditions in which these
people have developed that their lives
often seem abnormal Twisted scarcely
human
yet the directional tendency in them can
be trusted
the clue to understanding their behavior
is that they are striving and the only
ways that they perceive as available to
them to move toward growth toward
becoming
to healthy persons the result may seem
bizarre and futile
but they are life's desperate attempt to
become itself
end quote
so just let that sink in for a moment
the clue to understanding their behavior
is that they are striving and the only
ways that they perceive as available to
them to move toward growth
and in my mind this is the single most
valuable Concept in all of psychology
and when viewed through this lens no
behavior however maladaptive it may seem
on the surface is completely outside the
reach of compassion empathy and
understanding
I'm not saying that we need to condone
or accept behaviors that are harmful or
hurtful toward other people but at their
base all behaviors no matter how messed
up they may appear to healthy
individuals are actually an attempt to
survive so how does all of this apply to
narcissism and to NPD
well they've often said that NPD is a
disorder caused by deficits in the self
and the presence of maladaptive
strategies that are used to compensate
for those deficits
where there are gaps in the structure of
the self the individual learns to
compensate by filling in those gaps with
whatever they can use imagine going on a
backpacking trip and discovering after a
Long Day's hike Into the Wilderness that
you forgot to pack a tent and it's
starting to rain
what do you do
there's a deficit you don't have a tent
so you improvise you start to gather
whatever's available sticks leaves rocks
you repurpose what's already in your
pack clothes string shoelaces you make
do is it pretty probably not but it
might just make the difference between
dying of exposure on a Mountaintop and
living to see the sun rise the next
morning
people with narcissistic vulnerabilities
used whatever they could find to build a
shelter from the elements a place inside
of themselves where they could live a
self
and in the absence of proper materials
to build a self like consistent empathic
mirroring and Attunement from caregivers
parental warmth and genuine engagement
and connection positive peer affiliation
and inclusion
they may do with sticks strings and
t-shirts they found aspects of the
environment like big boulders
outcroppings and caves things that
weren't meant to be a shelter
and they repurposed them in order to
survive NPD is the legacy of such
makeshift survival tactics
except what worked well enough to get
through the storms of childhood doesn't
work well enough to survive and thrive
in adult relationships it doesn't work
well enough to weather the complexities
of adult life healthy grown-ups need to
be able to contend with ambiguities
they need to be flexible in
understanding of their own limitations
and the limitations of others they need
to have a stable foundation in order to
build a life
sticks leaves and string won't cut it
even the best cave is still a cave and
it leaves the person inside exposed to
the cold even if they're able to stay
dry but despite these shortcomings it's
so important to appreciate the strength
and resiliency that allowed the
individual to survive in the first place
so if you identify as a person who
struggles with narcissism or NPD take a
moment to Marvel at your own resiliency
recognize that you are so much more than
deficits and pathologies
you're a living breathing person and
you're here today listening to this
because you found a way to survive
battered and bruised though you may be
never forget this indisputable fact
just as it's important to grieve the
parts of the self that maybe never grew
or never developed it's crucial to
celebrate your status as a survivor of
whatever adversity you faced and believe
me if you identify as someone with NPD
then you faced adversity
even if you don't remember it or can't
identify what it was individuals with
NPD like those with other personality
disorders often have something called
identity diffusion that means they have
difficulty representing their own
experiences to themselves
a process that's also called mentalizing
and people with narcissistic personality
Styles often also have an avoidant
attachment style which causes them to
forget negative experiences or sort of
gloss over their childhood it's not
uncommon to hear people with avoidant
attachment Styles say things like my
childhood was great but without any
detail or the ability to recollect what
about it was actually quote great
this attachment style is actually
protective in nature because it serves
to reduce the amount of subjective
distress that the person feels and they
learn over time to focus instead on the
positive or to dissociate themselves in
times of difficulty or distress and this
serves to avoid activating their need
for Comfort Safety and Security because
they grew up in an environment where
Comfort Safety and Security weren't
forthcoming it's a legacy of early
emotional neglect
so whatever your story congratulations
you survived
never forget that
allow that to be the foundation for your
future work
whatever life throws your way your
status as a Survivor is already
established
as Carl Rogers said
you are striving to become
okay so that's it for today please leave
questions or comments and until next
time take good care
foreign
[Music][Music]
thank you
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is Dr Mark eatonson I'm a licensed
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of pathological narcissism and
Related Disorders
so I apologize for the gap between the
last episode and this one like most
people this time of year I've been
really busy but I wouldn't really be
telling the whole story if I just left
it at that in all honesty making this
content gives me anxiety sometimes and
as a result I find myself sometimes
avoiding it I have lots of worries not
making content that's accurate enough
not making content that's accessible
enough discovering after the fact that
there's some flaw in the video or the
audio
Etc but my main worry is really about
criticism part of me is always aware of
just how charged the topic of narcissism
can be and I worry that somehow
somewhere the wrong person will watch
one of these videos misunderstand the
content and then post it to some Forum
where hundreds or even thousands of
like-minded individuals will decide to
pick up their torches
share this feeling with you because it's
on topic with today's episode which is
social anxiety
I have no idea if my fantasy of
accidentally stumbling into widespread
Internet Hate is plausible or even
possible after all my channel is quite
small
but the likelihood of such a thing
happening isn't really the point because
we're talking about feelings and
Fantasies here and by the way when I use
the word fantasy I'm not using it in the
typical sense to mean imagining
something positive I'm actually using it
in the analytic sense where it refers to
something that's conjured up in the mind
that could be positive or negative or
neutral and in this case my fantasy is
definitely negative
so my negative fantasy is about
humiliation and it's about ostracization
and these are the sorts of fears that
form the basis of social anxiety
now in my Psychotherapy work with
patients I often encounter this kind of
anxiety it's actually common to a number
of psychological conditions and
disorders but today I'll be speaking
specifically about social anxiety in
pathological narcissism and NPD the idea
that narcissists would be socially
anxious might seem counterintuitive
after all according to the DSM
narcissists are supposed to be grandiose
exhibitionistic and preoccupied with
fantasies of power Brilliance Perfection
and Beauty how could such an individual
ever really worry that other people
wouldn't like them or wouldn't want them
around but as I've often discussed on
this podcast and in many of my other
videos on the heel NPD YouTube channel
the DSM doesn't tell the whole story
about narcissism and if you're
interested in a much longer and more
detailed take on that topic please see
the two-part video series that I made
called what is narcissism essentially
the DSM omits the vulnerable symptoms of
NPD and those are the symptoms that
actually ground it as a disorder because
they're about about distress and
dysfunction
those are the experiences that cause
people with NPD and pathological
narcissism to seek treatment one of them
is often social anxiety and when you
really think about it it makes sense
that narcissists might be socially
anxious common wisdom on the matter
notwithstanding the narcissistic
personality style is built as a defense
around deeply held fears of Shame and
humiliation and a core belief of many
narcissists is that they need to be
perfect in order to be loved sometimes
this belief is conscious but perhaps
more often it's unconscious and this
core perfectionism is based on early and
traumatic experiences of rejection
neglect being chronically misunderstood
or mischaracterized being used to
gratify a parent or caregiver's
narcissistic strivings feeling hated
unwanted or worthless when not living up
to the unrealistic standards imposed by
their family of origin essentially
narcissists were forged in the Kiln of
the ever-present threat of catastrophic
rejection their entire personality style
is constructed to defend against ever
having to experience the Primitive Agony
to use a term coined by Donald winicot
of being discarded by caregivers who
either couldn't or wouldn't empathize
with their child's emotional needs
so when you've built your identity
around the idea that you're only as good
as you appear or only as good as you
perform and when your experience has
taught you that there's no safety net of
supportive or empathic care to catch you
if you tumble into the chasm below the
stakes can feel extremely high
there can be immense pressure to not
only be accepted and liked but to
actually go above and beyond narcissists
often feel pressure to be celebrated
admired idealized because to them this
represents the ultimate confirmation of
their value and worth and the ultimate
Safeguard against the loss of self that
comes from rejection
such high pressure to perform often
leads to Exquisite sensitivity to social
rejection and this is often the Paradox
of narcissistic grandiosity because it
may appear that the narcissist is really
convinced that they truly are
extraordinary when it's actually more
often the case that they have a core
sense that if they aren't extraordinary
then in some way they will cease to
exist such pressure is inherently
destabilizing the personality often
can't manage the ever-present
existential Terror and threat of the
loss of self and the result is often a
constant cycling between periods of
depression and compensatory hypomania
and if you haven't heard that term
before hypomania is a period of
heightened energy and activity and
expansive mood that can often lead to
disruptions in the person's life and
relationships
pathological narcissism is sometimes
actually mistaken for bipolar disorder
but in narcissism the swings between
depression and hypomania are caused by
intra-psychic Dynamics and the high
pressure to perform
so I've worked with many patients who
describe the feeling that they can walk
into any room and instantly become the
center of attention seizing the
spotlight through sheer force of charm
and Charisma and such experiences of
being on become the high that
narcissists Chase there can be a
desperation for it which leads to trying
too hard and forcing a situation and
narcissists who are caught in this cycle
will sometimes climb so far out on a
limb socially that it breaks under their
own weight
these same patients who talk about this
high of being on socially we'll also
talk about the pain of feeling like in
some essential way they are outside The
Human Experience
of the burden of always having to watch
themselves and always having to gauge
how well they're doing of not ever
feeling like they can relax or let
themselves truly be in the moment always
the object of their own scrutiny or the
imagined scrutiny of other people they
end up feeling sort of like the main
character in sartre's existential novel
nausea and if you haven't read that I
highly recommend it it's a fantastic
description the first person description
of the feeling of fragmentation of self
and the loss of identity
so narcissism is built on the feeling
that there are no safe objects there's
no reliability anyone could suddenly
turn cold rejecting and unempathic at
any moment and it's therefore up to the
narcissist to maintain a kind of social
hyper vigilance they're always watching
themselves to make sure that they're
doing well enough to Merit continued
social acceptance and approval and
they're always watching others for even
the slightest hint of rejection because
in their mind rejection is like the
tumbling Pebble on the Mountainside that
inevitably leads to the catastrophic
Avalanche
so what can be done if you're someone
who identifies with what I've described
here how can you begin to address your
social anxiety
well first remember that knowledge is
power
my former supervisor and Mentor would
always talk about what a difference it
makes to be able to know about something
that's happening inside of you perhaps
up until now the Dynamics that I've
described today were something that you
knew about implicitly or unconsciously
but not something that you'd ever really
been able to take a look at and parse
out
knowing about something is actually the
first step to being able to do something
about it so really get to know your
social anxiety
start with the assumption that your
anxiety is based on experience assume
that it makes a kind of sense that
there's an internal logic to it assume
that it's meaningful
validate your own feelings don't dismiss
them right off the bat as aberrant
irrational or pathological
doing so is often simply a way to
re-enter Yourself by abandoning the
parts of you that need support
remember you've lived through something
and now you're becoming aware of the
legacy of that experience
at the same time don't assume that your
feelings are an accurate reflection of
reality there are feelings and there are
facts and they're not the same thing
your sensitivity to feeling rejected
might mean that you're more likely to be
rejected but it might not
you're feeling that someone doesn't like
you might mean that they actually don't
like you but it also might not
I've worked with many patients who would
mercilessly berate themselves for saying
something at a party or a meeting or a
get-together that they felt was cringy
or embarrassing they assume that their
feeling of having said something
embarrassing means that they actually
did and it also means that now they're
somehow a bad object to everyone
in reality people seldom notice remember
or care about the little things that
other people say or do remember no one's
paying as much attention to you as you
are
often the feeling of social catastrophe
is just that a Feeling
understand that these are old feelings
they go way back they're like old
Plumbing buried in the walls you know
sometimes old Plumbing makes noise
sometimes it affects the water pressure
so factor that into your narrative that
you tell yourself about your social
anxiety
greet your concern about being disliked
rejected or humiliated with compassion
remind yourself that you're actually
hearing from a very young part of you
these feelings go all the way back to
Childhood possibly even very early
childhood before you could even talk
when feelings could wash over your whole
self and you didn't have any tools to
keep yourself from being Swept Away
try to have the same patience with
yourself as you would have with a very
small child
talk to yourself as if you were that
child I know it can feel silly but it
actually works
when you've gotten good
and making space for your feelings at
greeting them with compassion and
understanding and when you can recognize
the social anxiety that you feel as a
reflection of early experience rather
than a reflection of your actual Worth
or actual external reality then you
might be ready for the next step in
dealing with anxiety which is exposure
the best way to treat any anxiety is
through exposure
we naturally want to avoid situations
that make us feel anxious and over time
this leads to something called
generalization we start by avoiding the
thing that gives us anxiety and then we
start to avoid stuff that's associated
with that thing and eventually we start
avoiding things that are associated with
the associations
Etc and this is how people go from a
single panic attack to full-blown
agoraphobia and not being able to leave
the house
addressing anxiety involves
intentionally confronting the situations
that make us anxious we need to feel the
anxiety and then when we come out the
other side we can reflect on the fact
that it didn't kill us
we survived it was unpleasant yeah but
uh not fatal and over time our range of
motion increases so in some ways that's
what I'm doing by recording this episode
today I'm exposing to my anxiety every
time I make one of these and then
somebody tells me that it helped them I
get a little bit better at tolerating
that anxiety and every time somebody
criticizes me online I'm able to reflect
on the fact that I can survive people
saying bad things about me we all have
our fears and our anxieties some people
are terrified of dogs others airplanes
many narcissists are socially anxious
but some aren't many other people have
social anxiety for reasons that have
nothing to do with narcissism
whatever burden you bear try to greet it
and yourself with compassion and
understanding remember the difference
between feelings and facts
challenge yourself to increase your
range of motion in the world rather than
allowing your life
to become narrow
okay so that's it for today as always
let me know if you have comments
questions or suggestions for future
episodes and until next time take good
care
[Music]
thank youhi everyone Dr Mark eatonson here just
making a quick video today to give a
shout out and my gratitude to Cluster B
milkshake who recently reviewed my book
uh and I have to say honestly I think
it's my favorite review of my book that
I've ever seen uh it's authentic it's
vulnerable it's funny it's profane I
loved every minute of it so thank you so
much for making that for recommending
the book to your audience I look forward
to checking out more of your channel and
I encourage anybody who's watching this
to do so as well so thanks again have a
Happy Thanksgiving and take good careHi everyone, my name is Dr. Eatensson.
Welcome to Healing NPD. This is part
three of a four-part series exploring
the narcissistic personality style
across different levels of severity. In
part one, we explored psychotic level
NPD, laying the foundation for
understanding the core concepts used in
this series. In part two, we discussed
borderline level NPD, further
elaborating on the developmental
continuum of personality organization
and associated object relations. If you
haven't watched those videos yet, I
recommend checking them out first. Links
are in the description. In this episode,
we'll explore the narcissistic
personality style at the neurotic level
of organization. At this level, we're no
longer talking about personality
disorders. In neurotic organization,
there are sufficient ego strengths and
capacities to defend against the
significant distortions of thought,
feeling, and perception that are
typically associated with personality
disorders. Here we encounter mature
object relations and a more organized
sense of self. The shift to neurotic
organization symbolizes the emergence of
stable and coherent self and object
images, the capacity for mature grief
and remorse, and ultimately the ability
to love others in a more stable and
balanced way. Due to the length and
complexity of the material, this portion
of the series has been divided into
three separate videos. Each segment
explores a distinct facet of
narcissistic personality style at the
neurotic level of organization. This
first video serves as a conceptual
bridge between immature modes of
perceiving the self and others and the
mature integrated object relations that
are characteristic of neurotic
organization. It begins with a review of
key components of psychotic and
borderline experience, building on
material covered in previous episodes in
order to trace the arc of development
toward a more continuous and coherent
experience of self. The capacity to
recognize others as stable and
autonomous subjects and the growing
ability to tolerate ambivalence,
disappointment, and loss without
fragmentation.
The core features of this developmental
leap are identified and clearly
articulated, laying the conceptual
groundwork for the material that
follows. In the second video, we'll
explore the emotional consequences of
this shift. What does it mean to become
a subject with a history, to experience
mature guilt and loss, and to grieve
what cannot be repaired? We'll also
examine how this developmental shift
occurs. What kinds of experiences,
relationships, and psychological
capacities make it possible to move from
fragmentation toward integration? In the
third and final video, we'll examine the
defenses associated with neurotic level
functioning. We'll look closely at how
individuals at this level manage
internal conflict. And we'll also
explore how narcissism appears at this
level, what makes it different from
personality disordered narcissism and
the therapeutic dynamics that tend to
arise in treatment with these
individuals. So let's get started.
[Music]
The progression from psychotic to
healthy personality organization is a
journey of
self-defin. We're not born with anything
resembling a clear sense of self. As
infants, we have no concept of who or
what we are. The world is a blur of
sensations and impulses. It's only
through time and experience that mental
images of the self begin to emerge from
the deluge of sensory
information. In infancy, we begin to
make rudimentary distinctions between
experiences that feel continuous with
our own bodies, such as the warmth of a
caregiver's touch, the soft fluidity of
milk while nursing, the containment of
being swaddled or held, or the soothing
tones of a caregiver's voice. and
experiences that disrupt this sense of
sameness, bringing us into stark
contrast with the outside world.
Theorist and analyst Thomas Ogden refers
to these cohesive, uninterrupted
experiences of sameness as contiguous
experiences.
These are sensations that sustain a
feeling of safety and reassurance,
facilitating what Donald Winnott called
going on being, a state of unbroken
revery in which thought, feeling, and
perception are allowed to flow
undisturbed. These contiguous
experiences form the foundational
building blocks of a non-traumatized
self, providing a safety or refuge from
disruptive and overwhelming sensory
experiences of otherness. such as the
cold, hard surfaces of the external
world, sensations of hunger or pain.
Such experiences of otherness fracture
the infant's sense of sameness and
belonging, laying the foundation for
what will eventually emerge as images of
the self and others. In moderation, such
disruptions help form an essential
developmental milestone, the idea of a
bounded surface, a delineated place
where the self resides. However, when
these are too frequent or too intense,
they overwhelm the infant's fragile
self-structure, leading to developmental
trauma.
What is a self after all but a concept
defined by the interplay of sameness and
otherness, belonging and separation? We
don't start life thinking of ourselves
as selves. The concept of self is
learned and its development begins with
simple caregiving dynamics. Are we held
often enough? Are we fed when hungry? Is
it warm enough? Does caregiving occur
predictably and consistently, allowing
us to discern patterns in the sensations
that we
experience? Or are we left crying for
hours, overwhelmed by hunger, cold, and
isolation? These early experiences,
consistent responsive care versus
neglect and disorganization, shape the
first layers of self-image, forming the
foundation of our eventual adult
identities.
When early experience is overwhelmingly
other. When caregiving is chronically
insufficient, leaving the infant too
often terrified, cold or hungry without
reassurance. The proto cannot
consolidate into a stable kernel of
selfhood and the stage is set for the
disorganized, fragmented perceptions and
experiences that often characterize
psychotic level organization.
If however early experience is quote
good enough, allowing for a tolerable
balance of sameness and otherness, the
proto can consolidate, establishing a
kernel of self that resists the
fragmentation typical of psychotic
experiences. This allows us to progress
from psychotic to borderline
organization. Although the self remains
malleable, porous, and vulnerable to
confusion with the outside world,
reality testing, though still unstable,
becomes more
reliable. Borderline organization is
marked by intense ambivalence about
being a separate self. Self and object
images overlap, particularly during
heightened emotional states, resulting
in confusion about interpersonal
dynamics. Are you hurting me or am I
hurting you?
Relationships with individuals organized
at the borderline level often involve a
game of hot potato concerning who is the
bad
object. Bad feelings are projected onto
others, denied or acted out via
disorienting and sometimes frighteningly
intense interpersonal conflicts. The
self may also come under assault by
harsh or critical introjects, which are
internalized aspects of abusive or
inflexible caregivers that can lead to
depressive symptoms, unforgiving
self-criticism, self harm, or even
suicide. Borderline organization is
characterized by conflicts around
identity, control, and autonomy. When
someone gets too close, the individual
may feel invaded or overwhelmed and push
them away. Conversely, when someone
takes a step back, the individual may
feel abandoned or rejected, leading to
clinging dependency, idealization, or
otherwise blurred boundaries in attempt
to restore a sense of sameness. The
borderline self is inherently unstable
and highly context dependent. This
instability known as identity diffusion
is a hallmark of borderline states. Due
to the fragile self structure in both
psychotic and borderline organizations,
both levels are dominated by paranoid
anxiety, which is a fear of loss or
annihilation of self. However, this
anxiety manifests differently at each
level. In psychotic organization,
paranoid anxiety fuels reality
distorting defenses, producing
persistent existential dread and a sense
that the self could utterly dissolve or
annihilate at any moment. In borderline
organization, paranoid anxiety produces
persistent
egoentrism, a self-focus that impairs
empathy and makes it difficult or
impossible to see other people clearly.
Now, this isn't the same thing as
selfishness. It's a primitive anxiety
about annihilation of self that fuels
preoccupations with bodily and psychic
integrity and produces highly reactive
states of mind. Minor conflicts can feel
like lifealtering emergencies. A breakup
can seem like the end of the world.
Small inconveniences can activate parts
of the self that already feel on the
verge of collapse, provoking extreme
anxiety or rage.
At the borderline level, paranoid
anxiety combines with blurred images of
the self and others to create perceptual
distortions. Significant others, family
members, friends, and co-workers shift
in and out of clear focus, at times
appearing to embody extreme qualities
that are actually projections. A friend
can suddenly seem like an enemy. A loved
child can abruptly feel devalued or even
hated. This dynamic reflects a lack of
object constancy. Images of the self and
others do not remain stable or
realistic, but instead mirror the
internal polarizations of the borderline
personality
organization. These instabilities
reflect deficits in ego functions. The
self is too unstable and
undifferentiated to hold images of the
self and others constant in the face of
shifting emotions and circumstances.
Psychotic individuals distort reality to
manage paranoid anxiety while borderline
individuals distort their self-image and
images of other people to do the same
thing. The world becomes a distorted
mirror reflecting the individual's
internal instability. And these
distortions affect both the present and
memories of the past. When someone is
devalued, they're not just perceived as
worthless in the moment. Rather, the
entire history of the relationship is
rewritten to confirm that they were
always worthless. And the same process
applies to
self-perceptions. At the borderline
level, there is no historical subject.
Objects move in and out of focus with
new histories invented to accommodate
each shift. And this defense obliterates
history to remove accountability which
is experienced as too threatening. and
thereby triggers paranoid anxiety. The
borderline self is traumatized and it's
easily overrun with feelings of badness
that evoke paranoid anxiety. Such
anxieties can be neutralized by
redrawing the lines of self and others
so that the bad feelings are perceived
to exist in someone else or rewriting
history so that the self is no longer
guilty of having done anything wrong.
Familiar borderline level narratives
include statements that blameshift or
minimize consequences of their actions
like I only did it because you wouldn't
listen to me or you made me feel so bad
so I got you back
etc. In addition, splitting can produce
a devalued selfate that evokes
reassuring or sympathetic responses.
You're right. I'm terrible and I don't
deserve to live. or I'm such a horrible
person that I don't deserve love and I'm
not surprised that you hate me. In both
cases, there's an inability to construct
a balanced, moderate, and realistic
version of events where neither the self
nor the other becomes a bad object. This
dynamic makes apologies feel hollow or
manipulative. If someone hurts you and
then apologizes by insisting they're
such a terrible person that they don't
deserve to live, it forces you to take
care of them, shifting attention away
from the harm that they caused. It's
important to underscore that these
dynamics are not usually intentionally
manipulative. They reflect the
borderline individual's unstable self-
structure, paranoid anxiety, and
tendency to blur boundaries in response
to strong emotions.
That being said, without stable images
of the self and others, without history,
there can be no real accountability.
Ogden's term for this mode of perceiving
and relating is self as object. It's
where both the self and others are
experienced as interchangeable objects
rather than stable, enduring subjects
with histories that can't be rewritten
to manage anxiety. He writes, "In a
realm of objects as opposed to subjects,
safety is attained through qualitative
shifts and magical all or nothing
transformations. The past is constantly
changing and each new event radically
changes all previous ones. The present
is immediately projected onto all
previous experience, thus annihilating
the past. The past becomes merely a
fluid extension of the present. Only
when another person can no longer be
magically recreated does it become
possible to miss someone who is away or
to mourn someone who has died or who has
left permanently. When the other can be
experienced as having an existence
separate from one's own, it becomes
possible to be with that person and be
away from that person in an entirely
different way from that which had been
possible previously. End quote. This
inability to hold the past constant and
the tendency to treat both self and
others as interchangeable objects
prevents authentic experiences like
grief and
mourning. The ability to experience
mature love, loss, and sorrow depends on
perceiving others as distinct enduring
subjects who cannot be magically
replaced through fantasy and projection.
Mature love requires seeing oneself and
others as stable, autonomous beings with
an immutable history. This is the
developmental shift that allows the
transition from borderline to neurotic
organization, bringing with it the
capacity to experience life as a
subject, one who is capable of helping
or harming others in ways that cannot be
denied, erased, or undone.
So far, we've explored the movement from
borderline to neurotic level
organization. A developmental shift that
opens the door to a more stable and
enduring experience of self and others.
This transition brings new capacities,
the ability to sustain coherent self and
object images, to tolerate
contradictions, and to begin recognizing
the emotional and relational
consequences of our actions. But these
gains also come with a cost. In the next
video, we'll begin to examine what
becomes possible and what becomes
painful when the self stabilizes. We'll
look at how the loss of defensive
fragmentation gives way to a deeper kind
of grief and how the capacity for
continuity also introduces the burdens
of guilt, accountability, and loss. I
hope you'll continue with part two.
Until next time, take good care.
[Music]hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eonon
welcome to heal NPD we're all familiar
with the grandiosity in pathological
narcissism and NPD things like arrogance
devaluing attitudes toward other people
and entitlement are often seen as
comprising the entirity of the disorder
but while grandiosity may be the most
visible aspect of pathological
narcissism it's far from the whole story
typically it's only the surface of a
much deeper more complex struggle
[Music]
in pathological narcissism and NPD
grandiosity is only the surface of
something much deeper beneath lies
profound vulnerability loss dependency
and shame these hidden Dynamics are
crucial to understanding the condition
grandiosity isn't just a trait or
behavior it's a defense one that
protects against feelings of fragility
and unmet emotional
needs pathological narcissism is the
result of a tragic disparity between a
child's emotional needs and what their
early care environment was able to
provide for decades the literature has
pointed again and again to a combination
of emotional neglect and subtle or overt
pressure that's placed on the child to
gratify a caregivers own narcissistic
strivings I call this a narcisso genic
environment and it's something I've
encountered countless times in my own
work as a narcissism specialist a
narciss ogenic environment is one where
the child's core emotional needs for
empathic mirroring are not being met
simultaneously the child is pushed to
fulfill a caregiver's emotional needs by
embodying the parents expectations in
response the child unconsciously
constructs a false self that appears to
be exactly what the caregiver wants it's
shiny compliant and seems to be without
any actual emotional needs of its own
the false self is an unconscious attempt
to be perfectly self-sufficient so that
the child can be spared the pain of
having needs that are rejected punished
or shamed it creates an illusion that
allows the child to survive in a world
where parental love is conditional but
like any illusion there's a reality
that's hidden from view Swiss
psychologist and psychoanalyst Alice
Miller described the false self as
having two sides one is grandiose and
the other is depressive she wrote I
consider one to be the reverse of the
other grandiosity and depression behind
manifest grandiosity depression is
constantly lurking and hiding behind a
depressive mood there are often
unconscious or or conscious but split
off fantasies of grandiosity end quote
the false self is an adaptation a
defense that allows the child to receive
some love or validation in an
environment where genuine love and
empathic connection are not available
leaving the child without the relational
tools needed to construct a stable and
realistic
self-image it's a life preserver that
gives form to an otherwise formless
internal experience
in a previous video I described the
false self as an island of cohesive
identity in a sea of identity diffusion
we don't become a self on our own
identity is inextricably relational what
is self is not other and what is other
is not self we discover who we are in
relationship to others we discover and
integrate our angry feelings destructive
feelings our hate joy and love in the
context of our earliest
relationships but what happens when a
child senses whether consciously or
unconsciously that their caregiver
simply can't tolerate the child's
authentic needs and
feelings what happens when the caregiver
simply ignores parts of the child that
they don't like even worse what happens
when a caregiver responds to those parts
with disgust or
disdain how does a small child who's
totally dependent on their caregiver for
love and support accept something that
is reacted to with Rage or disgust as
self moreover what if there is a
simultaneous pressure to be someone or
something that the child is not someone
or something that the caregiver wants or
needs the child to be children are
incredibly adaptable they do their best
to become exactly what their caregivers
want or need them to be it's a matter of
surv Bible ideally the caregiver's role
is to see and love the whole child to
celebrate the child's emerging
Independence and unique personality even
the unpleasant frustrating or
disappointing Parts caregivers should be
able to tolerate and quote survive the
child's anger fear need and
disappointment but some caregivers send
pervasive messages that they can't
withstand such feelings in the ch child
they respond to the child's anger or
sadness or other emotional needs with
their own Rage or by mocking the child
or making the child feel small
ridiculous or bad for having such
feelings they make the child a bad
object which feels so traumatic to most
children that they will immediately
begin to reorganize their growing Minds
to split off or conceal anything that
seems to result in loss of their
caregiver's love over time this pressure
becomes internalized the split-off parts
go underground a grandiose false self is
created one that's scrubbed of all the
traits or feelings that the caregiver
can't seem to
tolerate this version of self looks
independent and capable but in reality
it's still entirely dependent on other
people for validation and that's because
it's not a product of authentic
self-experience it doesn't really belong
to the child it's a patchwork of traits
and qualities that mirror what the
caregiver demanded it is therefore
forever Tethered to external approval
and validation the false self emerges to
compensate for a profound and tragic
loss the caregiver or selfobject that
the child needed wasn't available in the
way that the child needed the child
wasn't able to use the caregiver to
forge a stable integrated and authentic
self the real self was ignored in favor
of a false self what was true and
intrinsically theirs was overlooked or
actively discouraged in favor of a false
self that the caregiver seemed to prefer
this loss is profound and it represents
the very Foundation of narcissistic
defenses Alice Miller wrote the
narcissistically Disturbed patient did
not have a selfobject at his dis
disposal nor a usable object which could
survive the child's destructive emotions
both the depressive and the grandiose
person deny this Reality by living as
though the availability of the self
object could still be salvaged the
grandiose person through the illusion of
achievement and the depressive through
his constant fear of losing the self
object and quote grandiosity seeks to
undo this loss it says I'm impervious to
need I'll become so extraordinary that
no one will ever abandon me again
depression on the other hand is an
attack on the self in lie of an attack
on the object children tend to blame
themselves when bad things happen it
provides a feeling of control so when
caregivers aren't meeting a child's
emotional or attachment needs the child
might blame themselves they turn their
anger inward in order to regain a
feeling of control over something that's
otherwise totally outside of their
control the self is blamed in the hopes
that the loss could be undone if only
the self could improve but neither
grandiosity nor depression can change
the unchangeable the loss has already
happened only when this immutable
reality is accepted when the person
allows themsel to grieve what they never
got can the self begin to heal and move
forward the false self was created in
denial of this original loss this core
narcissistic wound but it quickly
becomes Its Own Prison the person grows
up to seek validation and admiration
which are experiences that reinforce
grandiosity and collude with the
individual's denial of the wounds that
lie
underneath however on some level the
person knows that the validation isn't
genuine it's praise for the false self
and they're aware deep down of profound
deficits and dependencies inside
themselves feelings that they may be
terrified to let anyone else see the
person feels compelled to keep it hidden
beneath a grandiose facade with the
result being that the love they receive
in adulthood often feels just as
conditional as the quote love they
received as children Miller writes it is
thus impossible for the grandiose person
to cut the tragic link between
admiration and love in his compulsion he
seeks insatiably for admiration of which
he never gets enough because admiration
is not the same thing as love end quote
unconsciously the person may desperately
want someone to see through these
defenses to truly understand the pain
underneath but most people are fooled by
the false self and those who do see
through these defenses are often
rejected before they have a chance to
expose the underlying shame so anger and
resentment build there's often contempt
toward people who are so easily fooled
by this facade and this contempt
reflects the depth of unmet emotional
need that lies underneath the individual
can't face the Unspeakable loss that
motivates their pain and necessitates
these defenses and so they end up sort
of rediscovering the same feelings of
rejection and conditional love over and
over again as they move through life
unaware that the very thing that allowed
them to survive childhood is now costing
them real intimacy and meaningful
connection this trap is
self-reinforcing the longer someone with
pathological narcissism or NPD spends in
a relationship the more invested it
feels everyone becomes in the false self
and the more they would risk by allowing
their authentic needs and feelings to
become known the stakes get higher and
honesty begins to feel less and less
possible sometimes this causes a sudden
shift a snap in their attitudes or
feelings in relationships adults who
were raised in a narcisso enic
environment may eventually discover a
veritable geyser of anger and resentment
toward their parents or caregivers that
they never realized was there I've had
parents of adult children reach out to
me confused and heartbroken because
they're formerly kind or respectful
child has suddenly turned toward them
with contempt such parents often meant
well when their child was young it's
hard to explain the emotional wounds
that their child likely carried they're
often too defended to really get it too
invested in their preferred narrative
that they were excellent parents and
that their child is simply inexplicably
bad all of a sudden they don't realize
when they say these things that they're
showing the very traits that caused the
problem in the first place they usually
won't allow themselves to face the
reality of what happened because it
would cost them too much in terms of
self-image or
self-esteem most choose to Simply remain
perplexed as to why their adult child
suddenly switch to open hostility after
Decades of deference I typically counsel
such parents to let go of their defenses
and to try to Simply listen and accept
whatever it is that their adult child is
telling them
whether or not they agree with it most
are unable or unwilling to do that and I
see in this sad but fairly common
predicament the continuing tragedy that
creates and maintains pathological
narcissism their adult child is
attempting to speak a truth that has
been hidden or denied for decades when
the pain has finally gotten unbearable
and the dam has finally burst the
parents again demonstrate an
unwillingness to see their child for who
they are rather than for who the parents
want or need them to be they think
they're doing the right thing they think
that the child's false self was the real
person and they want that false self
back again because it made them feel so
good about themselves as parents it
gratified them it can be incredibly
painful for parents to face this truth
and of course I'm not intending to blame
parents for poor mental health outcomes
most parents don't intend to harm their
children they're often doing the very
best that they can with the tools that
they have but acknowledging the past is
necessary for healing to begin and such
parents must recognize their child's
sudden anger toward them as the
emergence of a real person who they
either never knew or perhaps who they
never cared to know in the face of that
unfolding tragedy so many years before
their child created a false self to
avoid disaster it was a desperate
unconscious attempt to preserve the
caregiver's love the grandio false self
looks ego-driven but at its core it's
fundamentally relational and
paradoxically it's an attempt to
preserve connection yet when the
authentic self underneath is revealed it
often triggers a collapse into shame and
despair I remember sitting in a case
conference a colleague was presenting a
case that had significant narcissistic
elements and they were talking about the
patient's resistance to therapy I
offered this thought if the patient were
to allow themselves to be seen it would
trigger incredible shame but worse still
if they were ever to truly recognize the
false self- defenses that dominate their
lives they would be forced to face all
that was never
actualized all of the unexpressed
emotions all of the missed opportunities
for genuine connection
all of the authentic longings and
desires that were paved over in favor of
a shiny carrus designed to meet other
people's expectations essentially they
would be faced with grieving a life not
lived and where does anyone even start
with such a tremendous project this is
why NPD is often treatment resistant it
isn't because the person doesn't have a
heart or a soul it's because to face the
tragic cost of these defensive
would be to in some way face One's Own
Death a metaphorical death to be sure
but a kind of death nonetheless and one
that happened very early on Healing
Begins With accepting that loss the loss
that the false self was designed to deny
it's a Monumental task grieving not just
what was missing in the past but all the
opportunities for connection and
authenticity that were lost along Ong
the way this isn't something that
happens overnight grieving this loss
confronting these defenses and
rediscovering authenticity is a gradual
and often painful process but it's one
that leads to real freedom and authentic
connection Alice Miller described the
false self as offering a hollow prize
one that no one would actually want if
they had a choice between grandiosity
versus real love it's a defense against
grieving a terrifying and tragic loss
one that has already occurred and that
can't be undone you can't make up for it
by being amazing nor can you somehow
reclaim the love that wasn't received by
attacking the self what's done is done
the good news is that even though it
might feel like you died all those years
ago you didn't you actually survived
every once in a while I'll read an
article about some ancient mural or
mosaic discovered buried under a modern
Street in Rome when the dirt and debris
are cleared away there it is in all of
its former Vibrance and Glory it was
never gone it was just concealed and I
think the authentic self is like this
it's never really lost it's only hidden
from view once you realize this I mean
once you really get it that the love
you're seeking through grandiosity has
already been lost
that attacking or devaluing yourself
won't bring it back a sense of emptiness
usually follows if not grandiosity then
what what will bring my life meaning now
that grandio Pursuits feel empty and the
false self has been exposed for the
clown costume it always was whenever I
see that in a patient I know we're on
the right track because where the false
self was there authenticity shall be the
The Emptiness isn't a bad thing it's an
open space where something real can
emerge and grow I recently rewatched The
Karate Kid there's a beautiful scene
where Mr Miyagi is pruning bonsai trees
and he invites Daniel to do the same
Miyagi tells him to close his eyes and
to imagine how he wants his tree to look
Daniel says but how do I know if my idea
is the right one and Miyagi replies if
it comes from inside you
it's always the right one when you make
space for your authentic self to emerge
it's always right because it's true
whatever you're struggling with whatever
you're facing know that there is
absolutely 100% a real person inside of
you I don't know what you've been
through I don't know what you've
suffered or endured maybe you've hurt
people maybe you've even hurt
yourself take a page from miyagi's book
close close your eyes and breathe deeply
try to make a space inside for something
to emerge whatever comes up whether it's
an image a feeling or a memory make
space for it if it's a judgment about
yourself Let It Go if it's a striving to
be something you're not let it go
remember depression and grandiosity are
attempts to deny a loss that can't be
undone so let them go wait for something
else to emerge something that feels true
that feels like it's yours and then
follow it and see where it takes
you okay so that's it for today this
video started as a weekly Insight video
for my paid members but it evolved into
something that felt more appropriate for
main Channel content so I'm publishing a
companion to this video for paid members
on my channel and if you'd like to see
that video and also receive weekly
videos from my channel consider becoming
a paid member your support helps me to
make more content more often as always
please leave questions or comments below
and until next time take good care
[Music]Both avoidant children and pathological
narcissists appear to have experienced
an early emotionally invalidating
environment. In fact, when describing
the early experiences of narcissistic
patients, Otto Karnberg wrote, quote,
"Chronically cold parental figures with
covert but intense aggression is a very
frequent feature of the background of
these patients." End quote. Both
avoidant children and pathological
narcissists seem to have experienced
parental pressure to hide negative
emotions and instead display emotions
that are pleasing to their caregivers.
They learned to disconnect from their
authentic feelings, to turn the volume
down on their attachment needs,
eventually appearing not to have any
attachment needs whatsoever. Never.hi everyone welcome to weekly insights I
recently attended a virtual conference
at Harvard where some of the world's top
researchers and clinicians on
pathological narcissism and NPD
presented their work by far the most
impactful presentation was given by Dr
Solon akar a psychiatrist and
psychoanalyst Dr actar is 78 years old
and has had a truly prolific career
having authored edited or co-authored
over 300 Publications
but what was most impressive about his
presentation wasn't his academic
knowledge but its unvarnished Humanity
he spoke about many of the themes
presented on this channel the tragedy of
pathological narcissism the anxiety the
pressure and the
fear most touching I think was his
characterization of the loneliness and
isolation that he sees in his
narcissistic patients an isolation that
stems from the pressure to be as he put
it
extraordinary this pressure is
ubiquitous in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and NPD it forms
the basis of grandio self-experience and
idealized fantasies of the self
individuals with these issues aren't
allowed to be ordinary because when they
were young being ordinary was associated
with shame some were punished by
disappointing or disapproving Caregivers
for failing to meet expectations
some were ignored or neglected some were
so highly praised for being
extraordinary that anything less felt
like loss of Love whatever the specific
situation The Lesson Learned was that
the self needs to be extraordinary to be
any kind of a self at all Dr actar
really spent a lot of time on this
concept viewing it as the center of
pathological
narcissism the neglect or punishment of
the child's authentic quote ordinary
self is the first tragedy the second
tragedy is what happens next many of
these individuals grow up to actually be
extraordinary in some respect they're
often smart talented good-look
charismatic or otherwise successful Dr
actar said being extraordinary is
actually a
tragedy no one wants to be around an
extraordinary Ary person they're
intimidated they might look up to them
Envy them or want something from them
but to be extraordinary is to be alone
no one invites you to the neighborhood
barbecue no one feels comfortable
letting down their guard now this was a
simple characterization but it's one
that resonates with my own experience as
a specialist in this area of practice
many of my patients feel isolated and
alone many long to feel included in the
ordinariness of everyday life to feel a
sense of
belonging but to do so would require
letting go of the pressure the need to
be
extraordinary and in pathological
narcissism and NPD that need isn't
typically limited to areas of life in
which the person excels rather the
individual's identity is typically fused
with the need to be continually
perceived and validated as extraordinary
and this need is mutually exclusive with
being accepted or included it requires
that the individual stand out as
different above or other than everyone
else that's what it means to be
extraordinary not just in a limited set
of skills or Endeavors but as an
identity there's a steep price to pay
the pursuit of extraordinariness in
pathological narcissism and NPD isn't a
goal that can be reached in enjoyed it's
an existential demand that must be
continually met in the absence of a
sense of intrinsic worth and belonging
there's often a need to continually
elicit proof of one's
extraordinariness moments of validation
don't last they have to be continually
recaptured before they slip away and
this brings us to the heart of today's
discussion why do individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD struggle
so profoundly with
ordinariness what is the idea of being
just a person just one among many feel
so
intolerable for many being ordinary
doesn't just feel undesirable it
actually feels
annihilating ordinary means
invisible
interchangeable and for those whose
early experiences left them feeling
unseen or dismissed or conditionally
loved or ordinariness feels like
non-existence the fantasy of being
extraordinary isn't merely about wanting
admiration or success it's motivated
existentially if the self was only ever
recognized or valued when it was
exceptional then Fading Into the
background is experienced not as a
neutral state but as a form of
annihilation of self and this is why
narcissistic grandiosity isn't just
about arrogance it's a protective
structure that's built to ensure that
the self remains visible and
significant essentially
intact as Dr actar so poignantly
described extraordinariness is also
profoundly lonely the very thing that
seems to promise acceptance of the self
actually prevents it being admired is
not the same as being loved being envied
is not the same as being understood and
yet for many people with NPD these are
are the closest substitutes available
the problem is that admiration envy and
idealization are all inherently
asymmetrical they create distance rather
than bridging it and this is why many of
my patients describe deep feelings of
isolation even when they're socially
successful they often feel that love is
conditional hinging on their continued
performance of
extraordinariness they long for the kind
of easy mutual connection that other
people seem to take for granted but that
connection requires a willingness to be
seen as ordinary and that's where the
real conflict
emerges letting go of the need to be
extraordinary may feel like a kind of
death healing requires mourning not just
for the idealized self-image but for all
the childhood wounds that made it
necessary in the first place and it
requires tolerating the possibility that
one might not be the special ideal
version of self that always seemed
necessary to be any kind of a self at
all the ideal self was always an
illusion and even if it weren't it could
never actually be loved it could be
admired or needed or envied or even
celebrated but it couldn't be accepted
because it can never be real and this is
where Healing Begins
not in the dismantling of every ambition
or the rejection of all exceptional
qualities but in the loosening of the
need to feel extraordinary in order to
feel real it's in discovering that one's
existence doesn't depend on standing
apart from other people but in allowing
oneself to stand with
them now it goes without saying that
this isn't a simple process if you
identify with some of the things that
I'm saying here try to be gentle and
patient with yourself those are good
skills to have and they're also great
practice at taking steps towards not
having to be
extraordinary okay so that's it for
today the weekly Insight series is a
benefit for paid subscribers to the
channel for now I'm making every even
numbered episode publicly available but
if you'd like to receive videos like
these on a weekly basis consider
becoming a paid member I appreciate your
support and it helps me to devote more
time to this channel until next time
take good care
[Music]hi everyone this will just be a quick
little video to address what seems to be
widespread confusion about narcissism
i'm a clinical psychologist who writes
about researches and treats pathological
narcissism and related disorders and as
i've discussed in a few of my previous
videos narcissism is a very stigmatized
disorder it's extremely difficult to
find any information about npd or
narcissism online that isn't extremely
charged with skewed representations of
narcissists as predators and abusers and
isn't also hyper focused on a very
narrow definition of the disorder that's
actually extremely rare in the general
population here's a very simple and
accurate clinical definition of
narcissism it's adapted from an article
that appeared in the annual review of
clinical psychology in preparation for
the publication of the dsm-5 narcissism
is defined as the capacity to maintain a
relatively positive self-image through a
variety of self-affect and field
regulatory processes so what does that
mean exactly well it means that
narcissism as a clinical construct
refers to a person's ability to maintain
a positive stable and realistic
self-image despite the challenges that
life throws at them
now notice that this definition of
narcissism is not about mental illness
and that's because narcissism is a broad
concept in psychology and it refers to
both healthy and pathological
functioning
okay so here's the definition of
narcissism as a mental illness something
we call pathological narcissism
it's defined as difficulty maintaining a
positive realistic self-image
accompanied by deficits and effective
coping when threats to self-image are
encountered now notice i made no mention
of inflated self-esteem or
self-importance
pathological narcissism is not about
having too much of anything it's not
about having too much self-confidence
it's not about having too much
self-regard or too much vanity it's
defined by deficits
deficits and self-image deficits and
coping deficits and social functioning
and awareness
now these deficits show up in the form
of two broad phenotypic expressions of
pathological narcissism the first is one
that everybody's already familiar with
called narcissistic grandiosity
that's defined as dysfunction
characterized by an overvalued entitled
self-image exploitative exhibitionistic
behaviors absorption by idealized
fantasies and other maladaptive
self-enhancement strategies now this is
the picture of someone who has
difficulty maintaining a realistic and
stable self-image who compensates by
adopting an inflated sense of
self-importance it's the person who has
too little but pretends they have too
much
the second is one that not very many
people are familiar with it's called
narcissistic vulnerability it's defined
as dysfunction that's characterized by a
depleted enfeebled self-image angry
shameful and depressed affects
self-criticality suicidality
interpersonal hypersensitivity and
social withdrawal
this is the picture of a person who is
depressed ashamed and self-critical
sometimes to the point of being suicidal
they're sensitive to feeling rejected
and they avoid social gatherings it
isn't your stereotypical picture of a
narcissist
it's also important to remember that
these are not different types of
narcissist
all pathological narcissists fluctuate
between periods of grandiosity and
vulnerability the guy who seems
completely full of himself and like he
has an unrealistically positive
self-image likely goes through private
periods of breakdown and vulnerability
the same goes for the quietly depressed
narcissist who has an unrealistically
negative self-image that person likely
go through goes through intense periods
of grandiosity and inflated self-esteem
so the next time you come across a book
or a video or a website stigmatizing
narcissism remember that this is a
mental illness we're talking about and
one that is much more often expressed in
the form of fragile self-image and
chronic breakdown than a mustache
twirling social vampire the majority of
narcissists are just trying to keep a
stable realistic and relatively positive
self-image they have a social and
emotional disability they're not
monsters who are out to get anyone
okay thanks for listening and thanks for
joining me take care[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a licensed
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of pathological narcissism and
related issues
today i'd like to talk about
interpersonal sensitivity and the legacy
of relational trauma in narcissism
narcissistic individuals tend to be
hypersensitive to feeling criticized
rejected humiliated or ashamed this
tendency can be especially problematic
in both personal and professional
relationships because narcissistic
individuals tend to perceive criticism
where none was actually intended it
would be easy to simply pass this
tendency off as being about vanity and
entitlement essentially it would be easy
to say that well narcissists are so full
of themselves that they become angry
when others don't explicitly fall in
line and support their grandiose
self-image and for some individuals to a
certain extent that may be true but as
with so many aspects of this disorder
that explanation leaves out the heart of
the issue sensitivity to social
rejection in narcissism is really about
relational trauma in essence
narcissistic individuals become
triggered by the perception that they're
being criticized or by the feeling of
being humiliated rejected or shamed
so today i'd like to discuss what that
actually means in hopes that we can
further humanize this much maligned
disorder and at the same time i hope to
emphasize the issue of personal
responsibility
we can't help how we were raised and we
aren't ultimately responsible for the
feelings that arise in our conscious
experience but we are responsible for
our behaviors healing from npd involves
both viewing the self through a
compassionate lens and taking
responsibility for how we treat
ourselves and other people to begin i'd
like to acknowledge that nobody likes
social rejection it's normal to feel
defensive or angry when we're criticized
betrayed or humiliated these are
experiences that we all try to avoid
because they threaten our self-esteem
from an evolutionary psychology
perspective anger exists to motivate us
to protect something we value whether
it's a mama bear protecting her cubs or
a dog barking at somebody in the front
yard or two children screaming at each
other because they both want to play
with the same toy anger is about
protecting what is precious loved ones
property or even something as abstract
as self-image
we all have a preferred way of seeing
ourselves we want to feel like the
things we do are good and that they're
valued by other people and likewise we
also want to feel that we ourselves are
good and valued by other people when
we're denied that feeling we experience
things like disappointment shame
humiliation or anger for individuals
with stable self-esteem and a flexible
self-image social rejection can be
difficult to weather but for those with
unstable self-esteem or an inflexible
self-image it can be nearly impossible
narcissists become so reactive and angry
when they feel rejected because to them
self-esteem is a precious commodity and
the roots of this issue lie in
relational trauma i went to a weekend
training in mentalization-based
psychotherapy a few years ago it's a
popular approach for working with
borderline personality disorder and also
npd and the presenters made a point of
repeating that feeling misunderstood or
mischaracterized is a type of relational
trauma when we're young and first
putting together the pieces of a self
feeling misunderstood can be devastating
i invite you to think back to your own
childhood and i'll bet there's an
upsetting memory of someone
misunderstanding or mischaracterizing
you
maybe you were accused of lying when you
really hadn't maybe you got in trouble
for something that someone else had done
something happened that was unfair these
events however minor they may seem stick
with us because feeling understood is a
vital building block of self-image and
self-esteem personally i can remember
being in kindergarten i was at my after
school daycare someone fell off the
swing and the teacher punished me
because she thought that i had pushed
them i tried to tell her that i was
innocent
but she didn't believe me she even went
as far as to say that she had seen me do
it
now i knew that she was lying or at
least mistaken but i was powerless to
reestablish my good name if i try hard
enough i can still feel a surge of anger
inside of myself toward this probably
underpaid and overworked teacher who had
the unfortunate responsibility of
watching dozens of kindergartners her
aim that day wasn't to perpetrate an
injustice that would be remembered for
decades
but that's exactly what happened
it sounds ridiculous and in some ways it
is but not if we view it from the
perspective of a child with an immature
self-image i'm making such a big deal
out of this because in pathological
narcissism the self has been wounded
in many ways it remains not fully
developed
evidence is showing that relational
trauma can have a serious and lasting
impact on psychological development
and relational trauma can be something
sudden and horrifying like the
unexpected loss of a family member but i
think more often it's subtle and chronic
like persistent verbal or emotional
abuse or neglect
psychologists have long suspected that
pathological narcissism is the result of
a constellation of early relational
trauma
self-psychology which is the field of
psychology that studies pathological
narcissism points to caregivers who fail
to provide consistent attuned empathic
mirroring essentially the child grows up
feeling invisible to parents or even
worse feeling misunderstood and
mischaracterized this results in deep
wounds that sets the developing child at
odds with their own emotional and social
needs imagine if you were a young child
and you ran to show mom or dad your
latest work of art but instead of
celebrating your achievement they got
angry with you for bothering them or for
using too much paper and now imagine
that this sort of reaction was more the
rule than the exception over time you
might begin to feel hypersensitive to
sudden social rejection especially when
what you were really looking for was
approval you might become increasingly
shy about asking for said approval maybe
you begin to defend against your own
needs for approval by adopting an
attitude of superiority after all
perfect people don't need approval you
begin to bury your authentic needs for
love and acceptance under a defensive
facade otto kurnberg a famous author on
the topic of npd and the principal
developer of transference focused
psychotherapy notes that narcissistic
patients often describe
cold rejecting or covertly aggressive
treatment by their parents
in other words lack of attuned empathic
mirroring combined with feeling
overvalued or even exploited by parents
for one or more favored qualities
for example
a parent might brag to other people
about how smart or well-behaved a child
is while essentially ignoring that
child's authentic emotional needs on a
regular basis basically it's the
combination of a lack of warmth and
understanding combined with pressure to
do or be something that the child is not
that seems to produce a narcissistic
defensive
adaptation the child's developing
self-image becomes a quagmire of
conflicting representations comfort
seeking is paired with rejection and
humiliation being deserving of love
becomes attached to unrealistic ideals
essentially the necessity of being shiny
or flawless or a prize in order to earn
love the person becomes alienated from
their authentic self
and this is why narcissists tend to be
so sensitive to feeling criticized
these experiences trigger relational
trauma and the narcissistic person
lashes back with an angry attack
designed to deflect those triggering
feelings the narcissist is mounting a
defense of their self-image and it
doesn't matter whether the attack is
real or imagined
they are re-experiencing a devastating
trauma
their mind has been catapulted back to
another time and another setting
a time when they were small and
defenseless and this is an important
point to understand about trauma when
trauma is re-experienced it isn't
like the trauma is happening again
from a psychological perspective the
trauma is happening again
there's no subjective difference no
distinction between then and now here or
there
trauma is like a photograph on the wall
it doesn't change it doesn't grow or
admit new information when a
narcissistic individual with a history
of relational trauma is triggered by
social rejection they aren't feeling
quote as if the original trauma is
happening to them again in a very real
psychological way the original trauma is
happening to them again
and that's why the reactions can be so
severe and seemingly so detached from
what's actually going on the person is
back inside a room in their mind where
horrible things are happening
unspeakable betrayals of their most
basic needs for love acceptance and
safety unimaginable cruel or callous
treatment of their childhood self and i
don't say this to excuse behavior that
might be abusive but it is important to
understand that when a person is
re-experiencing trauma they aren't
accurately perceiving the situation and
of course there's a wide gray area
between slight hypersensitivity to
social rejection and full-on
re-experiencing of relational trauma
most people fall somewhere in between
relational trauma is also somewhat
tricky because the issues may have been
encoded at a time before the person
could even speak or before their self
had a chance to consolidate into a
coherent identity there may be cracks in
the foundation that can't be directly
seen but they can be detected by the
stress that's placed on other parts of
the structure
whenever we talk about childhood wounds
or
relational trauma or abuse or neglect
it tends to bring up angry feelings and
i think that's normal and it's okay
but i also want to stress the futility
of placing blame for this sort of
relational trauma
even well-meaning parents and caregivers
have massive blind spots
i haven't met a parent who didn't screw
their child up somehow
in a way it's inevitable
we're all human and we hurt those we
love
often without intending to
and even if that weren't the case even
if you had the worst parents in the
world
playing the blame game won't get you any
closer to a happy life whatever happened
happened
it's done
it's over
the task now
is to focus on the present
so what can you do in the here and now
if you notice this tendency in yourself
or someone you love
first
compassion remember that this behavior
happens because of an injury when we
sustain a physical injury we expect that
the area will be sensitive the same is
true for narcissistic injuries if you've
noticed or maybe received feedback that
you seem really sensitive to criticism
or that you often perceive others as
attacking or rejecting you when they
aren't really doing that then it may
help to remind yourself that you are
injured in a very particular way
where others might not perceive any
criticism at all
maybe you perceive a devastating blow to
your self-esteem work on giving more
space to both yourself and to other
people give yourself space to feel hurt
wounded or triggered excuse yourself to
go feel your feelings
you can say something like
i'm having a very strong reaction to
what you just said and i need some time
to make sense of my feelings but also
give others the benefit of the doubt
practice not immediately assuming that
they're trying to hurt you just because
you feel hurt instead
practice making the conscious choice to
assume that they have no idea that
you're vulnerable in this particular way
if you had a bruise on your back you
wouldn't hold it against someone for
patting you on the back and accidentally
hurting your bruise you might wince and
you might exclaim ouch
but you would understand that they
didn't know that you were injured try to
have that same mentality when it comes
to this emotional injury second
take responsibility others are not
responsible for your sensitivity you are
if you try to hold your family friends
or loved ones accountable for tiptoeing
around you all you'll succeed in doing
is driving them away this injury is
yours to bear and it's yours to heal
don't expect other people to alter their
behavior because you're sensitive you do
the work to make it better not them take
ownership of your pain understand that
it doesn't make you a bad person but it
also doesn't make you entitled to
special treatment this is where therapy
can be especially helpful a therapist
who's familiar with narcissistic issues
will be able to help you develop greater
self-compassion and greater
responsibility it isn't your fault that
you feel the way that you do but it also
isn't anyone else's fault either this
can be a particularly difficult pill to
swallow we naturally want revenge for
the ways that we were injured or hurt or
mistreated but chasing revenge fantasies
only drives us further and further into
pain when it comes to narcissism the
keys are acceptance compassion and
understanding as always this information
is presented for educational purposes
and it's not meant to address any
specific person or issue only a licensed
mental health professional who has
talked to you personally can provide
that sort of information
until next time take care
[Music]
you[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a licensed
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of pathological narcissism and
related disorders and i'm also author of
the book unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding the narcissist in your
life
so today i'd like to talk about
acceptance
acceptance really lies at the heart of
the healing process for many
psychological issues including npd
i used to work at an intensive
outpatient treatment program where we
used an approach called acceptance and
commitment therapy
which is often abbreviated simply as act
in this treatment program we had a lot
of folks who had severe anxiety
disorders and ocd and their suffering
was excruciating their lives had become
intolerably narrow
and there was so much that they could no
longer do
because of their anxiety their panic
attacks their obsessions and compulsions
so
you might be able to imagine that they
weren't always too happy
when the first thing that we would talk
about was acceptance
they didn't want to accept their anxiety
they wanted to get rid of it
but paradoxically
the best way to reduce the hold that
almost any psychological issue has over
your life
is acceptance
and here's why
a large percentage of the suffering in
mental illness is actually caused by
struggles that occur inside of ourselves
we struggle against feelings thoughts
fantasies and fears
we try to quote get rid of them
because they trouble us
but it isn't actually possible to get
rid of mental phenomena
the more we think about it and stress
over it the more room it takes up in our
minds
imagine trying desperately
not to think of an elephant
the very act of trying not to do that
is actually what brings the thought of
an elephant to mind
when it comes to thoughts and feelings
the harder we fight
the more they take over
and this is why acceptance is such a
powerful tool
it's a fundamental shift in our stance
toward whatever is troubling us
as the anxiety patients worked toward
acceptance
they experienced fewer panic attacks
fewer obsessions and they engaged in
fewer compulsions
the cloud of dread about having another
attack
slowly shifted into
an acceptance that attacks will occur
and this frees up energy to refocus on
living a life full of meaning
rather than a life spent trying to avoid
having more attacks
now i want to stress that acceptance
isn't the only tool a person needs on
the path of healing and recovery
but i would argue that it's one of the
most important
i also want to stress that acceptance is
not the same thing as resignation
you shouldn't just throw your hands up
and resign yourself to whatever's
troubling you
that's a passive stance and it actually
tends to drive people deeper into their
issues acceptance isn't passive it's
active
it's embracing what's there
with both understanding and compassion
so let's talk about how this concept
applies to narcissism
narcissistic individuals tend to fight
against parts of the self
they fight against feelings of
inferiority or envy or shame or weakness
they try to become someone else a person
who doesn't experience such unwanted
feelings
they strive toward
a state of self-sufficiency
need dependency vulnerability
these experiences belong to a part of
the self that gets split off
hidden away
sometimes even from the person
themselves
there tends to be a lot of reactivity to
those sorts of experiences
they're pushed away until they
inevitably gain enough mass to take over
and cause a collapse of the individual's
defenses
for some people this happens often
sometimes often enough that they exist
in a chronic state of collapse
but for others it can be relatively rare
but it's important to note that it
happens to everyone abraham lincoln
famously observed that a house divided
against itself cannot stand
the attempt to remove unwanted parts of
the self creates instability in the
person's self-image in their
relationships and in their professional
life
the harder we fight against who we are
the harder we inevitably fall
this is where acceptance comes into play
the unwanted parts of the self
are still parts of the self whether we
like it or not
they represent authentic experience they
hold important pieces of our story that
simply can't be left out
we actually lose more than we gain by
trying to disown them
healing the self means integration it
means no longer existing as
separated split off parts of a person
but that also means taking profound
ownership of whatever exists inside
it means accepting the defensive
adaptations that have developed to hide
and protect those vulnerable parts
grandiosity arrogance entitlement
self-centeredness
these are the parts of the narcissistic
experience that society rejects
and many individuals with this disorder
internalize that rejection and they
actually use it to further segment and
divide their internal experience
a house divided cannot stand
we cannot achieve peace
hating what's inside of us
so whatever you're struggling with
consider what life could be like without
that struggle
remember
that doesn't mean giving in or resigning
it means accepting what's inside as a
foundation for any work that might come
after
consider the possibility
that you could be a whole person
and that you could still be okay
it's a long process
and it's often a painful one
and it's hard to do on your own
which is why therapy is so important
but there's a simple step you can take
to get started on the path of acceptance
many people may have heard about
mindfulness meditation
it's very much in vogue in recent years
but there's a reason for that
mindfulness is all about acceptance
study after study continually shows us
that this basic shift in stance toward
our mental life is profoundly impactful
so here's how you do it
find a comfortable place to sit
keep a straight back and set a timer on
your phone for five minutes
close your eyes
and now focus on breathing in
and out
let the air go all the way down to your
diaphragm
and just watch
watch your breathing
and as you do
thoughts will come
you might feel ridiculous or impatient
you might feel skeptical
maybe you have an itch
or a cramp
you'll wonder when the time will be up
etcetera
all of it is normal
your only job is to watch your
experience
and let go
notice thoughts and feelings
but try not to judge them
try not to push them away
and try not to cling to them
try to just watch
and let them go
if you feel frustrated that you aren't
doing it right
just notice that feeling
and the judgment that's attached to it
and then let it go
when you notice you've drifted away from
your breath and into your thoughts
notice that and then gently return your
attention to your breathing
that's it
when the timer goes off get up and go
about your day
and over time
and with practice you can extend the
time you're meditating up to 20 30 or
even 40 minutes
meditation is both easier and more
difficult than it sounds
and you may be wondering uh what's the
point
well
active acceptance is like a muscle that
needs to be exercised in order to get
strong
every time you notice a thought feeling
or experience and then let it go
you're practicing acceptance
and the more you do this the better
you'll get at being less reactive to
unwanted thoughts and feelings in your
daily life
over time you'll notice more space
inside
more peace
less division
if you notice that you're having trouble
sitting in silence
there are lots of apps that can help you
with guided mindfulness meditations
but consider making this a daily
practice
as always this is general information
that's not intended to address anyone's
specific situation
if you struggle with narcissism or npd
you should seek the support of a
licensed mental health professional
who's trained
in working with this particular disorder
they can help you learn to recognize the
internal divisions and defenses that
drive narcissistic pathology
there are many parts of the self that we
simply can't see on our own
as the psychoanalyst wilfred beon
observed
some thoughts
take two people to think
okay so that's it for today
please reach out with questions or
suggestions for future episodes and
until next time take good care
[Music]
you[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a licensed
psychologist and author specializing in
the treatment of pathological narcissism
and related issues and just a quick
content warning
today's episode deals with the difficult
topic of suicide
feel free to circle back to this one
another time if you're feeling sensitive
to that topic right now
so
i also post my podcast on youtube and
one listener requested that i discuss
the idea of a false self
and i think that's a fantastic
suggestion
i think the false self is really central
to narcissistic pathology individuals
with npd have a lot in common with
individuals who have borderline
personality disorder
the underlying personality structure and
vulnerabilities are often very similar
but i think one of the main differences
if not the main difference is that
narcissists have developed a false self
that hides those vulnerabilities
so what is a false self
well the psychoanalyst and pediatrician
donald winicott coined the term to
describe a particularly painful form of
disconnect from authentic feelings that
he saw in the children that he treated
these children were discouraged from
feeling or expressing their true
emotions by caregivers who exerted a
kind of pervasive pressure on them to
adapt to the caregiver's needs
instead of the other way around
you know
in some ways parents are supposed to
adapt to their children they're supposed
to set their own needs aside to
prioritize the child's emotional growth
and development
monica noticed that some parents were
incapable of doing this
that instead of seeing the world from
their child's perspective they withheld
love warmth and affection unless the
child saw the world from the parents
perspective
and i've had memory that i'd like to
share
one that i think illustrates this
dynamic
i can vividly recall going to the public
swimming pool with my mom when i was
about 7 or 8 years old this pool had a
high dive and my mom was afraid of
heights
she wanted me to go off the high dive
and i happily agreed i wanted to impress
her to show her how brave i was
so i started up the ladder but very
quickly i discovered that i too was
afraid of heights and i froze
eventually i climbed back down
only to be met with what i think is the
coldest reception that i'd ever felt
she was furious
she demanded that i march my butt right
back over to the high dive and that i
jump off
and i tried
i tried again and again and again the
whole afternoon became about her
insistence that i jump off the high dive
that i do something that she herself was
too afraid to do
she didn't seem to grasp the hypocrisy
i could feel that she just couldn't
tolerate my fear and the message that i
i received
loud and clear was that this version of
me was not lovable to her
i can remember feeling so alone i had no
ally
the other kids were impatient because i
kept climbing up and down the ladder and
the lifeguard kept telling me to just
jump already
and my mom
was treating me like a nuisance someone
who wasn't hers
whenever i'd go back and beg her to just
let me swim in the regular pool
now funny enough i can't actually recall
whether or not i finally jumped
i think i might have but then again i
can also sort of remember feeling
defeated and ashamed on the way home
so maybe i didn't
but i don't think it matters whether or
not i jumped
the lesson that i learned that day was
that i needed to be a certain version of
a little boy
to find love and warmth and acceptance
there was no you know hey kiddo it's
okay you're just afraid i'm afraid too
let's go get some ice cream or don't
worry about it we'll deal with it
another time there was no comfort there
was no refuge only pressure
when these sorts of experiences
predominate in a person's life
it encourages the development of a
protective false self
essentially the child learns that only a
specific version of the self is lovable
the parts of the self that are afraid
hurt or emotionally needy or
inconvenient for the parent
must be driven underground in order to
win
being loved and accepted
and psychoanalyst and author alice
miller wrote about this extensively in
her essay titled depression and
grandiosity as related forms of
narcissistic disturbances she writes the
childhood trauma is repeated
the child is always the child his mother
admires but at the same time he senses
that so long as it's his qualities which
are being admired he's not really loved
for the person he is at any given time
dangerously close to pride in the child
shame is concealed lest he should fail
to fulfill the expectations
miller discusses the transient
hollow quality of what she calls the
metal of the false self
the false self is developed to
win the parents love and acceptance but
it's a tin medal at best because the
love that's won isn't real
it's forever contingent on the child's
continued performance of the qualities
that the parent admires
otto kernberg also points to the common
histories among narcissistic patients
of callous or cold treatment at the
hands of their parents
combined with over-valuation of the
child for one or more favored qualities
winnicott 2 discusses a similar theme he
notes that the the parent
substitutes the child's spontaneous
gesture for that of the parent
and this was the basis for winnicott's
theories concerning the false self
he perceived this sort of parental
intrusion on the infant's spontaneous
reverie to be a form of relational
trauma that over time
cuts the developing child off from
connection to their emotional
authenticity
he described what he considers to be the
ideal parent infant dyad in which the
caregiver actively facilitates something
that he called going on being the child
must first learn to connect completely
with the feelings and sensations that
arise from within
um children who are prevented or
discouraged from connecting to that
authentic wellspring of joy and vitality
and pain and sorrow
that's inside of them end up living a
dead-end existence
one in which they struggle continuously
to find anything in life that feels like
it's real
like it's theirs
he called this the false self
and he viewed it as a tragedy
a way of being in the world filled with
the pain of inauthentic living
the person strives over and over to be a
version of the self that will quote
merit love only to find that they never
actually feel loved they try to be
beautiful or shiny or perfect or
impressive
only to always feel essentially
invisible and hungry for the experience
of going on being that they were denied
stephen johnson is a contemporary
psychologist and author he wrote a
fantastic book called humanizing the
narcissistic style
and echoing winnicott and kernberg and
miller johnson describes narcissistic
injury as the caregivers need for the
individual to be something other than
who or what he or she really is
he writes that the child
dependent and vulnerable
will then deny his real self in order to
hold on to the mother
living up to her idealized expectations
and ministering to her narcissistic
needs the child denies and loses
his authentic self
he invests in the idealized false self
trying through it to regain what he lost
which is the love and respect echoing
and mirroring which were required for
him to discover accept and love his true
self in the first place
much of this literature unfairly focuses
on mothers
and when i teach these concepts i make
it a point to say that we aren't
specifically talking about mothers here
we're talking about caregivers and that
can include grandfathers or uncles aunts
fathers older siblings adoptive parents
and also mothers
the point isn't so much who encouraged
the development of a protective false
self
but rather that someone did and that
that set in motion a lifelong battle
between shame and grandiosity
so when working with these issues in
treatment the narcissistic patient must
eventually realize that healing involves
grieving a life not lived
they've existed as a false self
an attempt to be someone they are not
in some ways they may not have ever
really lived at all in a famous essay
winnicott discusses a patient who he
sadly could not save
he wonders if this patient
who tragically killed herself
he wonders if this patient was trying to
express in the therapy
a psychological reality that in some way
she had already died
that in fact she died in early infancy
he writes that he understood only too
late that this patient lived with the
emotional reality that she had in fact
been killed emotionally as a baby
grieving the loss of the true self can
be so painful
that many people spend their lives
laboring under the demands of a
protective false self
convinced that the final act of
excellence or superiority is right
around the corner and that they'll
finally be able to feel like a real
lovable person
now ironically
the only way to find that authenticity
is through grief
when someone has lived their life as a
false self
reconnecting with their authenticity
means finding what's real inside
and often
grief is the one emotion that can most
connect them to that child who was lost
or buried or killed
so many years before
now when i share winnicott's story with
students
they often don't really know what to
make of it
how could it be helpful to a patient to
tell them that in some crucial way
they've already died
but eventually
the students realize that we must follow
where the patient leads
and often with narcissistic patients
that is toward the terrible realization
that they too somehow
in an important way
died as a baby
and by that i mean they never really
lived
they were cut off from their own self
their own feelings forced to substitute
a falsehood for the truth
to play a role
instead of experiencing love
and this early death
must be acknowledged before it can be
grieved
and it must be grieved
before they can begin to live
now if you recognize your own experience
and what i'm saying here today please
know that it is possible to heal
it's possible to do this work
and to resuscitate that part of you
that got lost or abandoned or maybe even
killed
so long ago
we can't go back in time
we can't undo the past
the only path is forward but as long as
you're breathing
there's always a chance to begin to live
and also none of this is easy
so find a therapist who can walk this
difficult path with you
who can see the protective false self
for what it actually is
and that's a child's attempt
to be good enough
to deserve love
okay
well until next time take good care
[Music]
youhi everyone my name is Dr Mark eonon
welcome to heal NPD despite being one of
the more popular mental health topics
online pathological narcissism and NPD
are very misunderstood misinformation
confusion and stigmatizing
representations whip people into a
frenzied state of fear and loathing of
this disorder while leading them down
unhelpful paths so in this episode I'll
address some of the more common mistakes
about
narcissism
[Music]
misconception number one NPD is not a
mental illness the American Psychiatric
association is the largest Professional
Organization of psychiatrists in the
world they also published the DSM which
is the standard diagnostic system for
mental disorders used in the United
States the APA basically defines mental
illness
categorizing it into a system of
disorders that clinicians use to
diagnose their patients now according to
the APA all diagnosable mental disorders
are forms of mental illness and that
includes personality disorders like
NPD they go on to say that mental
illness consists of two main features
changes in thoughts feelings or
behaviors and problems and or distress
in work family or social settings the
APA also publishes peer reviewed
journals one of them featured this
article titled narcissistic personality
disorder progress in recognition and
treatment here's a quote major
depressive disorder is the most common
comorbid disorder in patients with
pathological narcissism or NPD the need
for self-enhancement and chronic
disillusionment with self make these
individuals particularly susceptible to
substance use suicidal preoccupation in
these patients is character
characterized by self-esteem
disregulation and life events that
decrease
self-esteem the diagnostic focus on
patients external characteristics and
interpersonal Behavior tends to dismiss
the importance of their internal
distress and painful experiences of
self-esteem fluctuations self-criticism
and emotional disregulation end quote
now this is a clear description of
mental illness involving changes in
thinking feeling and behavior and
involving clear problems in distress
that include risk of suicide and
comorbid disorders like major depressive
disorder whatever else you've heard
personality disorders like NPD and less
severe forms of narcissistic pathology
like pathological narcissism are
absolutely 100% mental illnesses
misconception number two NPD is
untreatable this is an old misconception
that simply won't die in part it's a
holdover from the early early mid 20th
century when the field of psychology had
not Advanced enough to treat many forms
of Psychopathology including
pathological narcissism however the
field has advanced considerably since
the 1930s 40s and 50s we have a much
better understanding of narcissistic
pathology and of the unique forms of
transference that occur with
narcissistic patients in therapy there's
been a revolution in the understanding
of pathologies like BPD and NPD several
therapy approaches have been developed
specifically to treat these issues
here's another quote from the article I
referenced earlier expected outcome in
treatment of NPD is dependent on a
number of factors including treatment
modality and focus the patient's
motivation and ability to establish and
sustain an alliance with the treatment
provider types of identified and
processed problems and external life
circumstances that either support or
intervene with treatment basically the
authors are saying that treatment
Effectiveness depends on the individual
and the same could be said for literally
any other mental disorder the article
goes on to list the following treatment
approaches for NPD psychoanalysis and
psychoanalytic Psychotherapy
psychodynamic Psychotherapy transference
Focus Psychotherapy schema Focus
Psychotherapy metacognitive
interpersonal Psychotherapy group
therapy dialectical behavioral therapy
and mentalization based therapy they
further list the following five areas of
change that are Central to treatment of
NPD interpersonal and Vocational
functioning sense of agency emotional
regulation reflective ability and the
ability to mourn in a future video I'll
go through each of these treatment
targets and why they're important but
for now just know that there are
numerous treatment approaches with
demonstrated Effectiveness in treating
NPD are any of them guaranteed to work
no there's no such thing as a treatment
in mental health that is 100% effective
treatment depends depends on the
individual and also on the goodness of
fit between the clinician the approach
and the patient whatever you've heard
about NPD not being treatable it's not
correct NPD is treatable there is hope
for Meaningful change if the person is
motivated and willing to do the work
misconception number three even if NPD
is treatable the gains are superficial
healing from this disorder is not
possible this one reflects the wi spread
misconception that people with NPD are
somehow fundamentally broken I hear
about it all the time in my practice and
I read about it in emails from people
around the world many of them are
terrified some to the point where
they're contemplating suicide they feel
like a lost cause and everywhere they
turn for information about this disorder
all they see are unsympathetic
stigmatizing
representations not a good combination
for a disorder that centers on unstable
self-esteem
unlike the previous point about
treatment options for NPD this one's a
little bit more subjective the question
of whether or not someone can quote heal
from the disorder is largely a matter of
perspective and the theoretical model
through which we're conceptualizing
pathological narcissism from the name of
this channel it should be clear that I
believe it's possible to heal I use
psychoanalytic Psychotherapy to treat
issues like pathological narcissism and
NPD remember that was one of the
treatments listed in the article I cited
earlier my Approach is heavily informed
by three schools of thought object
relations self psychology and the
Contemporary relational model through
this treatment lens disorders like BPD
and NPD are seen as developmental
arrests that result from early and
chronic relational trauma the person
becomes stuck in an archaic mode of
relating they become reliant on
developmentally immature coping
mechanisms that tend to distort re
reality disrupt the continuity of
internal experience and blur the
boundaries between the self and other
people over time these issues create
issues of their own keeping new injuries
on old ones and sending the person down
ever more unhelpful paths leaving them
vulnerable to additional traumas that in
turn perpetuate the cycle treatment is a
matter of helping the person to grow and
develop the capacities to negotiate life
without heavy Reliance on archaic coping
mechanisms like projection projective
identification denial and splitting it's
about encouraging the development of
important capacities like those listed
earlier agency emotional regulation
reflective ability and the ability to
mourn these changes are accomplished by
providing the conditions in therapy that
weren't necessarily present in the
person's early care environment things
like emotional validation the experience
of being seen for who they are on the
inside a space where it's possible to
explore feelings of Shame a space where
there's care consistency accountability
honesty warmth and most importantly a
space where there's empathy it consists
in walking a delicate line between
validating feelings without gratifying
pathological perspectives and behaviors
and this by the way is in direct
agreement with the current peer-reviewed
literature on the treatment of
pathological narcissism and NPD it's a
model that's based on implicit Trust of
the patients intrinsic capacity for
growth when presented with the right
conditions this approach is based on an
inside out understanding of the central
issues involved in pathological
narcissism rather than the common error
of focusing on external Behavior more
importantly it holds the patient's
Humanity at the very center of the
treatment and it makes space for the
pain and anguish that live at the heart
of the
disorder okay so let's say it's possible
through hard work work and dedication to
push through the developmental stuckness
to heal the wounded self and develop
more adaptive ways of coping and
communicating does that constitute a
cure well yes and no we don't really
talk about cures in mental health mental
disorders are not like medical disorders
we may someday develop a coherent
neurological model of Mental Illness but
for now we can seldom locate the broken
brain circuitry that we presume causes
the problem we therefore don't really
cure mental disorders we treat them
people get better over time they feel
less distressed they function more
effectively they're better able to
devote the time and mental energy to
things that matter in their lives they
become better at coping they become
better at being able to see themselves
realistically and to treat themselves
and other people with kindness and
respect now for some people we might as
well call this a cure but since we
didn't really understand on a biological
level what was causing the problem in
the first place we can't really say that
the problem has gone for good in the
case of personality disorders it's
absolutely possible to help someone grow
and develop the necessary capacities
such that they would no longer qualify
for a diagnosis of Personality Disorder
however they'll likely always retain the
personality style that corresponded to
the personality disorder and that's okay
we all have one or more dominant
personality Styles a narcissistic
personality style is one in which the
central concerns are about self-worth
and the primary defensive adaptations
are about maintaining self-esteem the
quote disorder part comes into play when
the person is unable to adequately cope
with those Central concerns and their
life begins to fall apart having a
narcissistic personality style doesn't
make someone a narcissist or mean that
they have NPD when I work with someone
who has NPD I tell them that they'll
probably always have narcissistic
concerns about self-worth but that the
level of distress that they feel about
those concerns and the amount that those
concerns dominate their life and
relationships will likely improve and
that's about as close to a cure as we
can get misconception number four all
narcissists are
abusers this is an especially difficult
one because it seems to be about
advocating for victims people
understandably want to place a spot
light on the harm that people with NPD
can cause to those around them in my
very first video I outlined the ways
that the current diagnostic criteria for
NPD are partly responsible for this
because they focus exclusively on
grandiose traits of the disorder and
that was a reaction by the American
Psychiatric association in the mid1
1980s to the perception that their
diagnostic system was too heavily
steeped in psychoanalytic models of
Psychopathology narcissism is after all
originally a psycho analytic concept the
term was popularized by Freud himself in
1914 so to create a theoretically
neutral diagnostic system the APA
revised the definition of NPD so that it
focused only on observable traits
unfortunately this removed the heart of
the disorder and made NPD into sort of a
hollow caricature with traits that seem
to come and go depending on the
situation recall the article cited
earlier the one that warned against the
mistake of focusing only on external
attributes of NPD to really understand
the disorder we need to look Beyond
grandiosity people have been writing
about this ever since the APA changed
the diagnostic criteria for NPD in the
1980s here's a quote from an article
that appeared around that time the
desire to exclude reference to
dynamically unconscious mental activity
continues to hamper some categories for
example narcissistic personality
disorder easily describes the overtly
aggressive expression of narcissistic
conflict but deals poorly with the
equally Disturbed quiet passive
narcissistic patients whose grandiosity
is concealed behind a facade of
compliance or shyness end quote the
current DSM description of NPD provides
a clinical picture of an entitled
arrogant unsympathetic individual who
demands constant praise and admiration
and while this certainly describes one
possible narcissistic presentation
it by no means represents all possible
presentations by removing mention of the
more vulnerable features including
fragility of self introjective
preoccupations feelings of worthlessness
Shame and humiliation difficulties in
close relationships depression illness
anxiety social anxiety social isolation
and
suicidality the APA has elevated one
pole of narcissistic disturbance at the
expense of the other
the last 20 years of research have been
slowly rediscovering those discarded
facets of NPD a growing number of
peer-reviewed Articles have been calling
for a new revision of the diagnostic
criteria for this disorder one that
grounds it in deficits and disabilities
rather than the current picture of
vanity egotism and arrogance in 2013 the
DSM 5 took an important step in this
Direction with the inclusion of an
alternative diagnostic criteria for NPD
that emphasizes impairment in at least
two of the following four areas of life
identity self-direction empathy and
intimacy similarly the dsm5 text
revision released in 2022 contains
important additions to the diagnostic
description of NPD that includes fragile
self-esteem perfectionism vulnerability
to emotional overwhelm and suicidality
but unfortunately these additions have
yet to appear in in the actual
diagnostic checklist that everyone
references when they make videos or
write articles describing narcissism
however slowly we are restoring a more
comprehensive picture of this form of
mental illness one that's grounded in
psychological distress and dysfunction
and one that views arrogance and
grandiosity as symptoms of a disorder
that's really about self-image that's
really about identity and that's really
about deficits in the ability to relate
authentically
in relationships and this is why I'm
always emphasizing that NPD and
pathological narcissism are forms of
mental illness I don't say that to
undermine a person's responsibility for
their actions I say it because we need
to think about pathological narcissism
as a comprehensible condition one that's
based on a disordered system of thoughts
feelings and behaviors this system has a
kind of internal logic it makes sense
when you think about it as a mental
illness instead of quote the
disorder simply labeling people with NPD
as abusers Predators or evil tells us
nothing about what's actually happening
on the inside and that disempowers
everyone people who are hurt or abused
can't make sense of what happened
because there's no sense to be made
Beyond these people are abusers people
with NPD can't heal if the only
information available is people with NPD
are abusers and Society can't make sense
of the Dynamics that lead to and result
from NPD amidst a never-ending chorus of
they're all abusers Full Stop
pathological narcissism is not a fancy
term for abuser mental illness does not
cause abusive Behavior please don't take
my word for it here's what the National
Domestic Violence Hotline has to say
about this a common assumption we hear
at the hotline is that abuse is caused
by a person's mental health condition
for for example bipolar disorder
depression anxiety post-traumatic stress
disorder narcissistic personality
borderline personality or antisocial
personality while these are serious
mental health conditions they do not
cause abuse nothing in the diagnostic
and statistical Manual of mental
disorders fifth edition states that a
mental illness solely causes a partner
to be abusive in a relationship however
there are a select few diagnoses that
can increase the risk R of abusive
patterns to show up in a relationship
and in other areas of life mental
illness tends to impact all areas of a
person's life such as work interactions
with friends family engagement and
personal relationships in contrast abuse
primarily impacts personal relationships
and typically not the other areas of
life end quote sometimes the internal
conflicts that cause pathological
narcissism are expressed in the form of
inter personal antagonism and that can
lead to abusive behaviors as stated in
the quote I just read some diagnoses can
increase the risk of abusive behaviors
but the behaviors themselves are not
caused by NPD there are in fact many
forms of mental illness that can
increase the likelihood of abusive
patterns of behavior mental disorders
change the way a person thinks feels or
behaves causing problems or distress in
work family or social settings
while it's generally true that people
with mental illnesses are more likely to
be the victims of abuse it's also true
that people with mental illness
experience changes in perception
judgment impulse control and behavior
these changes sometimes lead to
mistreatment or abuse of other people
NPD is by no means alone in this regard
we need to be able to say things about
NPD and pathological narcissism Beyond
those people are abusers we we need to
be able to actually treat this disorder
and people who suffer from it need
access to information that consists of
more than pictures of devils or evili
eyed people surrounded by mist and smoke
so if you're trying to shut down
discourse about the actual mental
illness behind NPD you aren't doing
anyone any favors you're actually
perpetuating mental health stigma you're
making it harder for people to get
treatment and you're most likely making
it harder for everyone to heal
perhaps yourself included misconception
number five NPD can't be a mental
illness because narcissists change their
behavior depending on the situation okay
this is a big one it rests on a
fundamental misunderstanding of one of
the main issues in personality disorders
like BPD and NPD which is something
called splitting when someone with NPD
quote love bombs what they're really
doing is idealizing and idealizing new
romantic Partners is part of the
diagnostic criteria for NPD the second
diagnostic Criterion listed in the DSM
is preoccupation with fantasies of
unlimited power success Brilliance
beauty or ideal love idealization is one
side of a psychological split that
occurs in pathological narcissism and
NPD the other side is devaluation
idealizing inevitably turns into
devaluing as a clinician when I
experience a patient idealizing me I
know that I need to buckle up because
eventually it will turn to
devaluation and this is not some
voluntary or intentional process on the
part of the patient it's based on
unconscious personality dynamics that
rewrite both the present moment and all
of history when a person with NPD or BPD
idealizes you they literally can't see
any of your flaws furthermore they have
no recollection in that state of mind of
you ever having had any flaws and this
is a prime example of the sort of
distorted perception that's inherent in
personality disorders like NPD when the
equation flips and they begin to devalue
you they literally can't see anything
good about you furthermore history is
Rewritten in that state of mind so that
they can't remember ever having seen
anything good about you and this is a
well documented phenomenon according to
the American Psychological association's
dictionary of psychology splitting is
quote a defense mechanism used to
protect someone from conflict in which
objects provoking anxiety and
ambivalence are dichotomized into
extreme representations with either
positive or negative qualities resulting
in polarized viewpoints that fluctuate
in extremes of seeing the self and
others as either all good or all bad end
quote people who don't understand
splitting will mistake the sudden and
extreme reversal from idealization to
devaluing as a form of deception they
will think that the person was just
buttering them up in order to use them
after they got what they wanted they
dropped or discarded them but that's not
what's actually happening when we talk
about splitting the narcissist is
genuinely swept up in their
idealizations they truly believe that
they finally found the perfect love
object the perfect job or the perfect
friend but the coin eventually flipped
eventually the idealizations turn to
devaluations and the narcissist begins
to see only disappointment only
inadequacy only contempt this love bomb
SL discard cycle is caused by splitting
not some nefarious plan to use and throw
people away the narcissist is also
victimized by this cycle by the way they
continually think they finally found the
one only to have everything turned to
guard garbage because of their own
psychological Dynamics all of us you me
people with NPD were all more likely to
blur the boundaries between ourselves
and the people with whom we're close
including family members romantic
partners and our children that's just a
fact of Human Relationships but when a
person has a personality disorder those
blurred boundaries become more extreme
there's a higher likelihood that the
narcissistic individual will project
idealized or devalued parts of their own
self onto those people with whom they
live because those relationships tend to
be more emotionally charged and also
more familiar they're therefore more
likely to treat family members or
romantic partners with contempt to
devalue or criticize them or to express
their emotional disconstraint at them in
the form of emotional or even physical
abuse but what about when they suddenly
switch from angry and derisive Behavior
behind closed doors to smiling and
friendly Behavior at the neighborhood
barbecue how are they able to switch so
suddenly so seemingly completely doesn't
that mean that their behavior is a
choice doesn't that mean that they're
evil no NPD is not a highly visible
disorder the dysfunctions tend to be
somewhat concealed behind a facade of
high- Performing charm and affability
and this is a consequence of the
disorder itself narcissism involves the
creation of a false self that hides
internal distress and conflict again
this is why the authors of the article
cited earlier warn that we can't simply
focus on external appearances in NPD
it's not the whole story the external
appearance conceals the actual
disordered parts of the personality
chances are you can sit nicely at a
fancy restaurant even if you aren't
feeling particularly calm I'm sure you
can code switch when talking to a
uniform police Poli officer even if
you've done nothing wrong you're
probably more respectful more
deferential even if you were screaming
at your kids in the back seat 2 minutes
before pulling over you probably do your
best to appear calm and in control when
the police officer walks up to your
window these are basic social
adaptations that we all use to function
in society we speak respectfully at job
interviews we dress up to go to church
we smile and say I'm fine how are you to
acquaintances at work the ability to
superficially change our Behavior does
not mean that we don't have a mental
illness it just means that we can
function well enough to hold a job and
not get carded off to jail these social
cues are strong and we learn them when
we're very young just because a person
with NPD sits nicely at church or smiles
and tells a joke to a stranger at the
store doesn't mean they aren't mentally
ill there are many forms of mental
illness that don't necessarily involve
involve profound loss of control over
one's Behavior NPD is one of them the
combination of an emotionally charg
situation in the context of a close and
familiar relationship increases the
likelihood that the person with NPD will
start blurring boundaries and projecting
and that's why their behavior seems to
fluctuate based on the situation it's
actually a facet of the disorder itself
not an argument against them having a
mental
illness okay so that's all for today I
hope this has been helpful in clearing
up some of these misconceptions if this
information felt controversial to you or
if it flew in the face of everything
you've read or heard about narcissism
then consider the possibility that
you've been consuming
misinformation everything I've said here
can be backed up by numerous Bonafide
references authoritative sources on
mental illness like the American
Psychiatric association the American
Psychological Association and
peer-reviewed clinical and research
literature there's a lot of really bad
messaging out there about NPD no one is
saying it isn't a problematic form of
Mental Illness but it's a mental illness
nonetheless and it's also one that can
be treated so if you or a loved one have
this disorder don't give up hope until
next time take good
[Music]
care andhi everyone Dr Mark eatonson here
specialist in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and related
issues this is just a quick video to
clear up some confusion out there with
respect to terminology I see a lot of
people misusing the term overt and
covert when it comes to narcissism and
NPD people tend to use the word covert
to describe vulnerable narcissistic
presentations and they tend to use the
word overt to describe grandiose
presentations but these terms actually
don't mean the same thing
all narcissistic individuals have both
overt and covert traits overt simply
means that it's readily apparent and
observable it's on the surface obvious
to everyone covert means that it's under
the surface it's hidden it's implicit
maybe unconscious it's not obvious to
everyone maybe not even the person
themselves
also all narcissistic individuals have
both vulnerable and grandiose traits I
made this grid to help clarify the issue
here we have the x-axis representing the
Continuum of vulnerable to grandiose
presentations and the y-axis represents
the Continuum of overt to covert
presentations and as you can see an
individual can be both overt and
vulnerable or they can be both covert
and grandiose
and typically they are inversely
proportional that means that overt
vulnerability is driven by covert
grandiosity and vice versa so I'll give
you an example to help explain let's say
that an individual with NPD is depressed
because they feel they sort of didn't
perform well enough at a party the night
before they've maybe they feel that
nobody likes them they didn't make a
positive enough impression they were
essentially ignored
and this is a common feeling amongst
narcissistic individuals by the way uh
they present in an overt manner with
distress and upset they're feeling
depression and anxiety they're
experiencing some degree of
fragmentation and overwhelm these are
the obvious symptoms they're the ones
that they're talking about
in this case the narcissistic
presentation is overtly vulnerable
meaning that their vulnerable symptoms
are obvious and apparent
but what's actually driving the
breakdown
the answer is covert grandiosity the
individual expects that they should be
the center of attention at the party
they have unconscious entitled
expectations about how other people
should react to them and make them feel
underlying perfectionism vanity and
grandiosity is fueling the feeling that
nobody likes them because not enough
people made them feel special wanted
seen or admired so we would locate this
person here on the chart
because they're displaying overt
vulnerability but remember
the overt vulnerability is driven by
covert grandiosity they're inversely
proportional
now what about somebody who's presenting
with overt or obvious grandiosity
the associated covert vulnerability
becomes apparent when we remember that
overt grandiosity like arrogance
devaluation and entitlement is actually
defensive
the narcissistic individual adopts these
postures in order to compensate for
underlying feelings of emptiness
worthlessness and shame
remember the covert features are always
driving the overt features
covert grandiosity drives overt
vulnerability
covert vulnerability drives over
grandiosity
always look for the side of the equation
that isn't being directly expressed
okay so that's it for today hopefully
this will be helpful in clearing up some
of the confusion out there about
terminology feel free to give this video
a like if you found it helpful until
next time take good caredespite the widespread online pessimism
concerning treatment for NPD viewing
these issues through the lens of
attachment provides hope for Meaningful
change it is possible to change your
attachment style as an adult to achieve
something called earned secure
attachmentChildhood attachment patterns eventually
turn into adult attachment patterns.
This chart shows the four adult
attachment styles and how they relate to
underlying internal working models of
the self and of other people. On the
x-axis is model of self which is also
sometimes called attachment anxiety and
on the y ais is model of others which is
also sometimes called attachment
avoidance. These dimensions of
attachment anxiety and attachment
avoidance combined to form four
prototypical adult attachment patterns.according to attachment Theory we're all
born with an instinct to form attachment
bonds with one or more significant
caregivers this instinct is embedded
into something called the attachment
system which helps regulate the child's
proximity to their caregiver during the
first few years of life the caregiver
functions as a secure base a stable and
attentive Foundation of care and
reassurance from which the infant or
young child can begin to explore their
world whenever things get too upsetting
the attachment system kicks in causing
the child to cry or cling to their
caregiver in order to reestablish the
feeling of Safety and Securitythis insensitive rejecting and intrusive
quality of interaction creates a
negative model of others and therefore
high levels of attachment avoidance
these children learn that their
attachment seeking behaviors are likely
to be rejected and instead of expressing
their attachment needs these children
learn to deactivate their attachment
system through something called
displacement they've simply learned not
to express their attachment needs openly
they're being taught to ignore them and
over time this form of Regulation
becomes autonomic and unconscious
resulting in the avoidant attachment
patterns that we see in adults both
avoidant children and pathological
narcissists appear to have experienced
an early emotionally invalidating
environment in fact when describing the
early experiences of narcissistic
patients Otto kernberg wrote quote
chronically cold parental figures with
covert but intense aggression is a very
frequent feature of the background of
these patients end quotethis strategy Bears much in common with
earlier described psychodynamic models
of the grandiose false self just as in
dismissing avoidant attachment
individuals with grandiose narcissistic
presentations use an unconscious
strategy of ignoring the authentic needs
of the self there's an adaptation to
disavow subjective distress but just as
with avoidant children the distress
rages under the surface in effect
grandiose narcissism involves two models
of of self superimposed on each other
one is defensively positive while
underneath lies a negative model of self
that is hungry neglected needful chaotic
and filled with disavowed experiences of
rejection and intolerance of its own
attachment needs when the grandiose
model of self breaks down it exposes the
individual to the underlying negative
model of self and we call this
vulnerable narcissismover time these patterns of interactions
are organized into something called
internal working models these are
unconscious expectations about how Human
Relationships work there's an internal
working model for the self and there's a
corresponding internal working model of
other people these internal working
models combine in predictable ways to
form attachment patterns in early
childhood attachment patterns are
observable measurable and relatively
consistent throughout development
they can be correlated with all sorts of
outcomesThese unconscious distortions can lead
to maladaptive or even harmful behaviors
that seem reasonable to the person in
the moment. They push perceptions of the
self and of other people into extreme
categories. Those in relationships with
such individuals might reasonably
conclude that the person is actually a
diabolical liar and manipulator. When
the individual is wildly derogatory in
devaluing one moment and then shifts to
viewing themselves as the agrieved party
in the next moment, it has every
appearance of intentional and cynical
manipulation strategies like
gaslighting. I'm not attempting to
excuse manipulative or abusive behavior.
In most circumstances, individuals with
borderline organizations have sufficient
contact with reality to be accountable
for their actions. But borderline issues
do involve significantly skewed
perceptions of the self and others and
reliance on unconscious defense
mechanisms that blur boundaries and that
prevent the individual from having full
awareness of what they're doing and why
they're doing it. It's a level of object
relations where reality floats in and
out of clear focus. When emotionally
overwhelmed, the individual may regress
back to a level of object relations that
is basically psychotic. And when things
are going well, they may appear to
function at or near the neurotic level
where the self-concept is integrated and
stable. It's a confusing, somewhat
disturbing range of psychological
functioning.Most of the information online about NPD
is unhelpful at best because it lacks a
fundamental understanding of the
defensive adaptations that characterize
pathological narcissism and therefore
it's missing the key ingredient that
everyone needs to understand and heal
from these issues. Empathy. Narcissism
can only be properly understood through
an empathetic frame. The hurt child at
the center of pathological narcissism is
ignored by caregivers, then ignored by
the narcissists themselves, then
misunderstood and ignored by society.
And that's the tragic nature of this
disorder. The false self is so good at
hiding the hurt child that nobody ever
sees them and they go on hurting and
trying not to hurt via problematic
relationship behaviors that sometimes
end up hurting others. When you
experience a collapse into
vulnerability, try to use that as a
window into that central pain, that hurt
child, don't try to get away, ignore, or
punish that part of yourself. That's
what caused the problem in the first
place. Instead, try to get closer. Try
to call upon the grown-up parts of you
to see that child compassionately and
empathetically.
Recognize that these vulnerable feelings
of shame, embarrassment, longing, fear,
depression, loneliness, dependency, and
even rage belong to a hurt Fire.pathological narcissism is a form of
mental illness that causes unstable
self-esteem it's also often associated
with arrogant or dismissing attitudes
toward other people occasionally the
grandiosity breaks down into feelings of
worthlessness depression and an intense
need for reassurance from others these
Dynamics can be difficult to understand
but by viewing them through the lens of
attachment Theory we can obtain insight
into where they come from how they
develop and perhaps most importantly how
they can be treated itPathological narcissism is the result of
a tragic disparity between a child's
emotional needs and what their early
care environment was able to provide.
For decades, the literature has pointed
again and again to a combination of
emotional neglect and subtle or overt
pressure that's placed on the child to
gratify a caregiver's own narcissistic
strivings. I call this a narcissogenic
environment, and it's something I've
encountered countless times in my own
work as a narcissism specialist. A
narcissogenic environment is one where
the child's core emotional needs for
empathic mirroring are not being met.
Simultaneously, the child is pushed to
fulfill a caregiver's emotional needs by
embodying the parents expectations. In
response, the child unconsciously
constructs a false self that appears to
be exactly what the caregiver wants.these relationships between pathological
narcissism and attachment are important
because attachment studies can draw
direct lines between early care
experiences and adult Psychopathology
and that's because attachment
researchers have studied parent child
interactions categorizing infants into
attachment categories during the first
few years of life and then following
those children through development and
into adulthood looking at pathological
narcissism through the lens of
attachment provides a glimpse into the
inter internal working models of
grandiose and vulnerable narcissists and
it also gives us Clues concerning how
those internal working models were
formedTo be clear, psychotic individuals are
typically at risk for abuse from other
people. However, individuals in this
range of functioning can also be
unpredictable, impulsive, or even
dangerous under the right circumstances.
They may believe that they're fighting
for their very survival in situations
where most people would only be mildly
anxious. If you begin to suspect that a
person is psychotic, then it's best to
avoid confrontations. It's likely that
they won't be able to engage in rational
or productive discourse. They will more
likely perceive your confrontation as a
threat, confusing it with already
terrifying, primitive anxieties that
can't be effectively managed. The best
thing to do is to be supportive but
boundared. Offer reassurances if the
person is frightened and seek help if
the person is a danger to themselves or
to someonenow in some ways the appearance of
psychotically organized individuals is
similar across all personality Styles
and this is because of how early in
development these issues are thought to
originate essentially freezing parts of
the personality in a Proto or
undeveloped State psychotically
organized individuals are intolerant of
their own selfhood the Mind
unconsciously attacks its own abilities
to make meaning out of experience
there's an intense and primitive fear of
both both being a self and also of
dissolving into non-being because the
immature self structure present in
psychotically organized individuals can
cause such abject confusion and fear it
can actually cause those around them to
take a caretaking role to be clear
psychotic individuals are typically at
risk for abuse from other people however
individuals in this range of functioning
can also be unpredictable impulsive or
even dangerous under the right
circumstancesupsetting experiences aren't just
uncomfortable they often feel traumatic
as BPD expert Marsha linahan describes
it quote they're like people with third
degree burns over 90% of their bodies
lacking emotional skin they feel Agony
at the slightest touch end quote
splitting helps contain the devastation
and Pain by separating parts of the self
into isolated containers sort of like
siloed parts of the self internal
communication between between these
parts is often limited such divisions or
splits in the personality protect the
person from being overwhelmed by trauma
Bound images of the self and other
people splitting is remarkably effective
but it's also costly it's an defense
that we all use in early childhood it
allows us to preserve self-esteem and to
protect important attachment
Relationships by keeping the bad
separate from the good we avoid the
anxiety or confusion that comes from
recognizing both positive and negative
traits in ourselves or other people
before we have the ego function to
balance these
contradictions over time most people
integrate positive and negative feelings
into a cohesive whole but in borderline
organizations this ability is not
reliably developed often due to Chronic
relational trauma or adverse childhood
experiences[Music]
personality is best understood as a
complex set of adaptations we develop
ways of getting our psychological needs
met and ways of protecting ourselves
from harm many of these adaptations are
made in early childhood and they're
based on the intersection between
genetics and experience we end up with
one or more dominant personality Styles
these are characteristic ways of
thinking feeling perceiving and behaving
that are defined by core conflicts and
Central beliefs that each of us has
about ourselves and about other people
the narcissistic personality style
involves adaptations around the issue of
self-esteem to defend against
self-esteem collapse defenses are
utilized that seek self-esteem
inflation these defensive adaptations
protect the self and attempt to
compensate for internal self-esteem
resources that are otherwise lacking the
effectiveness of these defenses mostly
depends on the level of dysfunction in
the personality individuals on the
healthier end of the narcissistic
Spectrum tend to utilize flexible
defenses that help them resolve
conflicts while increasing social
support individuals at the more severe
end tend to use defenses that are
disruptive to their daily lives damaging
to their relationships and even ones
that distort reality all of this is tied
to a person's developmental maturity and
the severity of the disturbances that
are caused by the central conflict
around self-esteem as someone moves up
the spectrum of Developmental maturity
their use of problematic defenses goes
down and this is true for any
personality style not just narcissistic
the more integrated stable and defined
our self-image the less we need to rely
on reality distorting boundary blurring
or truth obfuscating
defenses this development spectrum is
defined by several distinct levels of
Personality organization Each of which
contain a developmental challenge that
must be successfully negotiated to move
to the next level the first challenge is
learning to tolerate realityhi everyone welcome to weekly insights
in a previous video I described
narcissistic abuse as a relational
dynamic in which one person exploits or
uses another in a way that negates their
subjectivity their complex full Humanity
in order to meet their own self-esteem
needs prominent theorists consider this
form of abuse to be pathogenic of NPD
when it's done to small children
representing the original narcissistic
wound around which the maladaptive false
self and grandiose compensations are
built the child grows into an adult who
does not recognize their own complex
subjectivity and who also struggles to
treat other people as subjects rather
than
objects as the individual does to others
what was originally done to them they
create narcissistic wounding in their
Partners children and other important
relationships over time the injuries
propagate outward perpet uating cycles
of devaluation and harm at the core of
pathological narcissism is profound
psychological injury genetic
vulnerabilities and innate sensitivities
in the child are compounded upon and
exploited by caregivers to gratify their
own narcissistic strivings for for
validation and mirroring the child's
authentic emotional and attachment needs
are displaced in favor of the centrality
of the caregivers needs the child is
used as an auxiliary source of
self-esteem when the child behaves in a
way that runs counter to what the
caregiver wants or needs they are
sometimes dismissed criticized or mocked
and that leads to distorted
internalizations that disrupt the
development of a realistic and stable
self-experience such treatment is
traumatic the child protects themselves
by constructing a protective structure a
defensive personality constellation
that's designed to Shield the self from
overwhelming feelings of vulnerability
shame or
inadequacy however this defense comes at
a terrible cost the capacity to see and
appreciate the full complex Humanity of
both themselves and other people
everything becomes about the pressure
inside to feel seen validated accepted
and
understood this adaptation is typically
accompanied by the Persistence of
immature defenses like splitting that
skew perceptions of the self and others
fragmenting them into polarized extremes
of good and bad idealized and
devalued the ability to appreciate
nuance and complexity in the self and
other people is compromised such as the
pressure to be a good self that meets
the conditional approval of the
narcissistically preoccupied
caregiver devalued parts of the self are
projected onto others who are perceived
as bad objects who are are then
criticized mocked shamed or humiliated
and this process mirrors the poor or
insensitive treatment to which the child
was subjected whenever they failed to
meet the caregiver's
expectations these Dynamics often
persist into adulthood forming the basis
of what is often called narcissistic
abuse where family members or
significant others are unconsciously
treated by the individual as objects
that are either good or bad pleasing and
gratifying or disappointing Ing and
contempt and this is actually a
recapitulation of what was done to the
person with NPD when they were young
thus narcissistic abuse that was done to
the child is now enacted by the grown
individual they unconsciously do to
others what was done to them but it
doesn't stop there the person on the
receiving end of this treatment is
pushed into a similarly defensive
posture they find themselves fighting
for the legitimacy of their own selfhood
their goodness their worth their
perception of themselves is slowly
distorted into polarities of good and
bad valuable and worthless mirroring the
internal struggle of the individual with
NPD this Dynamic can be profoundly
disorienting many people in these
relationships become consumed by a
desperate need to prove their basic
decency especially when the person with
NPD has projected their own unbearable
feelings of inadequacy onto them making
them feel as though they're flawed or
broken the person feels like something
has been taken from them having spent so
long in a distorted inner personal
reality in which their subjectivity was
devalued or ignored and in which they
were treated as an extension of someone
else they're often angry enraged even
they're hungry for validation and easily
triggered into feeling criticized we
could say that now they are also
narcissistically wounded the effects of
this wounding depend on the individual
and on the nature of the
relationship some are more resilient
having been raised with a secure base
and a strong but flexible self-image but
such individuals also tend to recognize
and therefore avoid dysfunctional
situations instead it's often
individuals who already have
vulnerability to dysfunctional dynamics
that end up gravitating toward
relationships where such dysfunctions
will be repeated when they finally leave
such relationships they're often angry
depleted and desperate to restore a
sense of
self and thus the narcissistic wounding
can continue to
propagate they may find themselves
turning to online forums voicing their
pain in ways that categorically
dehumanize and invalidate the struggles
of other people strangers they've never
met and onto whom they now project the
bad feelings inside of them that they're
desperate to
expel they seek to reassert their own
goodness by identifying another group of
people as irredeemable or even evil now
it's completely understandable to turn
to forums or communities for support but
some discussions can inadvertently
reinforce polarized thinking this harm
propagates because our minds seek
equilibrium being devalued or used
narcissistically creates unbearable
psychic tension it creates narrow
internal spaces where there seems to be
only two options either the self is good
or it's bad to achieve alignment with a
good self-image anything bad inside must
be expelled via projection or other
defense mechanisms and it has a net
result of dehumanizing everyone
involved I started this channel in an
attempt to break the cycle that I was
seeing online first the narcissist is
hurt as a child then the hurt propagates
to others then those others turn to
forums or videos that validate their
anger while trapping them in the same
cycle of polarized thinking and
dehumanization I want to emphasize that
anger and self- protection are natural
and adaptive responses to such a
experiences anger can be a powerful tool
for reclaiming boundaries and dignity
but like all tools it can also be
counterproductive when overused or
misdirected there's an important
difference between adaptive anger and
stagnating anger that's anger that
actually Keeps Us locked in our pain my
aim here is to create understanding
rather than
polarization to spread nuanced
compassionate representations of the
humanity Behind These Dynamics in
narcissism and narcissistic abuse the
humanity of both parties has been
compromised by the same Dynamic and the
tendency of that Dynamic is to spread
regardless of which Link in the chain
you currently occupy the one who was
wounded as a child or the one who was
wounded in an adult relationship with
someone who was wounded as a child The
Way Forward is always to lean into
complexity
Healing Begins when we can hold both
truths
simultaneously the hurt you experienced
is real and unjust and your reactions
are understandable responses to profound
pain at the same time the person causing
it was also shaped by harm that they
could not process acknowledging this
cycle doesn't mean excusing the harm you
experienced it simply helps us
understand the larger patterns that at
play and hopefully to find a way out of
them hurt people hurt people and now
that you are also a hurt person the
answer isn't to dehumanize others in the
hopes that doing so will somehow restore
what you feel was taken from you it also
means recognizing when our own defensive
reactions have begun to mirror the very
patterns we want to escape if you find
yourself consumed with proving your own
goodness by attacking or labeling others
whether or not they have NPD it may be
worth asking where do you still feel
unseen unworthy or
hurt healing is not about identifying
villains it's about reclaiming your full
self your complexity your worth and your
ability to Define your own path moving
forward all right so that's it for today
this video is part of a weekly series
for paid subscribers to the channel so
if you found it helpful and if you'd
like to receive more videos like this on
a weekly basis consider becoming a paid
subscriber until next time take good
care
[Music]hi everyone welcome to weekly insights
we're celebrating Thanksgiving in the US
this week so I wanted to talk about
gratitude you know I think gratitude can
be a helpful concept and it's often one
that's used in therapy through practices
like keeping a gratitude
Journal but encouraging gratitude in
therapy can also be
problematic while some people might take
it as an invitation to reflect on the
things that they have in their life that
are good to other people it can feel
invalidating it can feel like the
therapist just doesn't get how bad
things are how bad they feel in therapy
we watch out for something called
enactments These are ways that the
therapist and the patient can get pulled
into unconsciously reenacting some
hurtful Dynamic from the patient's past
many people who struggle with
pathological narcissism or NPD were
raised in emotionally invalidating
environments family system where there
was pressure pressure to feel or to
appear or to act a certain way because
that's what the caregiver needed or
wanted such pressure can actually drive
a wedge between a child and their
authentic thoughts and feelings leading
to inauthentic experience and false
self- Dynamics well-meaning therapists
might suggest gratitude when patients
express feelings of emptiness or
depletion or depression and the patient
tries to focus on gratitude but ends up
just feeling even
worse when I was growing up my family
used to go around the table at
Thanksgiving with each person saying
what they were thankful for now for this
story to make sense you need to know
that my family wasn't exactly functional
so I frequently felt like I couldn't
think of anything I was thankful for the
exercise was supposed to make everyone
feel close but it actually had the
opposite effect I often felt alone and
to make matters worse i' then have to
lie and say I felt thankful when I
really didn't see the concept of
gratitude implies that there's someone
or something to whom we feel thankful
and not everyone feels that way as a
therapist I find it's common for
patients to feel conflicted about the
concept of gratitude so this
Thanksgiving I'm not recommending
gratitude to any of my patients instead
I'm asking them to reflect on what's
valuable to them perhaps that doesn't
seem very different and in some ways it
isn't but value doesn't carry quite the
same baggage as gratitude it doesn't
necessarily implicate anyone else to
whom you must feel thankful when we try
to Jin up positive feelings to counter
negative ones we just end up feeling
crazy in psychoanalytic terms that's
called a manic
defense Instead try this look inside and
accept whatever you find there maybe
it's good maybe it's bad maybe it's
neutral whatever it is just allow it to
be how you feel then try to make a
little extra space next to it to reflect
on what's valuable to you right now in
this moment can't think of anything no
problem Instead try to think about what
makes you anxious and that's because
anxiety is based on fear and we fear
losing things that we value if you're
anxious about anything then it means
that you value something so what is it
health safety belonging a good feeling
you want to hold on to the hope that
things might someday
improve maybe you're not
anxious well no problem think about what
makes you mad anger is a feeling that
protects the things we value if you feel
angry it means you value something
whatever your situation there's
something that you have that's valuable
to you and try to make just a little
extra space inside for that aspect of
your life to be appreciated by you it
doesn't have to be perfect it doesn't
even have to be real it can be a dream
an ambition a memory and here's what's
most important whatever it is it can
coexist with whatever else is in inside
of you the good can sit right next to
the not so good or even the
bad okay so that's it for this week I'm
making this insights Video available to
everyone because of the upcoming holiday
but if you like this video and you'd
like to have videos like these available
every week then you can access them by
becoming a member of my
channel you may be wondering why I'm not
on camera for this one uh and it's
because I've realized that uh if I have
a video component then it actually adds
a lot of time to my workflow and since
I'm trying to make these on a weekly
basis uh I'm hoping that uh by just
doing audio I can um actually make that
of reality until next time take good
care
[Music]hi everyone welcome to weekly insights
today I'd like to talk about the
difference between narcissism and
self-love there's a tendency for people
to think that these two terms mean the
same thing that narcissism simply refers
to an inflated sense of self-importance
but the concept of narcissism is
actually much more broad it's
foundational to psychology and it
encompasses both a healthy and distorted
or even abusive relationship with self
healthy self-love or healthy narcissism
involves having a stable realistic and
positive relationship with self in many
ways healthy self-love is like having a
healthy love for another person one
where you acknowledge that person's
flaws and imperfections but you still
accept and value them for who they are
while your emotions might fluctuate
depending on circumstances your basic
feeling of care for them does not and
this is because you see and value the
actual person not just their performance
or how they make you feel healthy
self-love involves a similar ability to
see and value yourself as a
three-dimensional person one whose
fundamental value doesn't rise or fall
depending on performance it involves
realistically appraising your strengths
and weaknesses being patient with
yourself when you fall short of your
goals gently holding yourself
accountable when you've hurt someone or
made a mistake and providing yourself
with encouragement to grow and develop
As you move through life remember
healthy self-love involves a realistic
stable and positive
self-image in contrast pathological
narcissism involves an unrealistic and
unstable self-image one that's often
driven by a Relentless need to live up
to an idealized version of the self this
creates internal pressure to perform to
achieve
or to project a facade of success often
this comes at the expense of
authenticity unlike healthy self-love
which strives to value and accept the
whole self pathological narcissism
resembles an unhealthy relationship with
another person one that's conditional
and dependent on constant validation or
Perfection imagine for a second if you
only loved another person when they met
your expectations but you dismissed or
devou valued them whenever they fell
short this wouldn't be real love it
would be an attachment to an ideal or a
fantasy rather than to the person
themselves pathological narcissism works
in the same way it's less about
embracing the self and more about
chasing an unattainable image now this
pattern of relating to oneself doesn't
emerge in a vacuum identity is
co-constructed in significant
relationships throughout our lives and
pathological narcissism often stems from
internalized distorted self-images that
are formed during early childhood these
self-images are shaped by our
interactions with caregivers peers and
other significant figures and they
reflect how we were seen how we were
valued or devalued by other people
addressing these deeply rooted patterns
requires the corrective experience of a
different relationship and that's why
these issues are best explored in the
context of therapy where a licensed
therapist provides a safe and consistent
environment for understanding and change
treatment involves slowly constructing a
new self-image in the context of the
therapeutic relationship this new image
is tempered by the therapist's awareness
and acceptance of your flaws and
Imperfections and it's grounded in the
therapist's ability to perceive you in a
realistic light and also in their
curiosity to know you as a whole person
since not everyone has access to therapy
another helpful practice can be
self-reflection notice how you're
talking to yourself and imagine if you
would speak that way to a loved one
notice if you're being overly critical
or unrealistically idealizing of
yourself the goal is to develop a stable
realistic and accepting relationship
with who you are and this shift involves
being mindful of how you treat yourself
and trying to offer yourself the same
Grace and compassion that you might
offer someone that you cared about
remember this is a journey not a
destination and it's okay to take small
steps along the way okay so that's it
for today as always thanks for watching
and if you found this helpful you can
receive these videos on a weekly basis
by becoming a paid member of my channel
your support is appreciated because it
helps me to make more content more
frequently I hope this Insight helps you
on your journey of self-discovery and
self-acceptance and until next time take
good care
[Music]hi everyone happy New Year this week's
Insight involves polarized or
dichotomous thinking especially as it
relates to self- experience after my
last video on the concept of the false
self I noticed some comments expressing
distress and confusion about what parts
of self-experience can be considered
quote true and what parts should be
considered quote false Concepts like
this can be misleading uh because they
seem to suggest that self experience can
or should be chopped into pieces
separating the good or true Parts while
discarding the bad or false Parts but
that's not really how it works it's
important to recognize that even our
best psychological models are really
vast
oversimplifications when it comes to
parts of the self the answer is almost
always both and rather than either
or in Clinical Psychology we describe
Behavior and feelings as overdetermined
and that means that they arise from
multiple sources
simultaneously it's extremely difficult
if not impossible to isolate a single
cause for any given internal experience
there will always be layers and layers
of
complexity instead of seeking certainty
we generate narratives working models
and we evaluate how well those
narratives or models resonate with both
the facts and the subjective experience
of the individual and we do this with
the awareness that no narrative can
fully capture the whole
truth similarly just as thoughts
feelings and behaviors arise from
multiple simultaneous causes they also
serve multiple simultaneous functions
even a simple Behavior like eating can
serve many functions at the same time
from regulating emotions to
strengthening attachment bonds to
expressing feelings like aggression to
satiating hunger and distracting from
discomfort when we try to describe the
complexity of internal experience
language inevitably falls short models
of personality and emotion are just that
they're models they're approximations
abstractions that help us make sense of
experience and identify patterns but
they should never be taken as literal
represent ations of reality Concepts
like the true and false self are best
understood this way as tools that
describe subjective Dynamics when we
talk about a quote false self we're
describing the development of an
implicit narrative a kind of unconscious
story about who a person believes they
must be often shaped by external
pressures rather than emerging
organically from authentic emotional
discovery y the falseness of it lies in
the way that the self was constructed
around the expectations of other people
rather than out of a genuine exploration
of one's emotional life but this idea
shouldn't be taken as an absolute it's a
flexible framework and it's only useful
in so far as it helps us to make sense
of an individual's lived experience and
observable patterns the danger comes
when we try to treat these Concepts as
literal truths because it it tends to
lead to rigid self-judgments rather than
openness to complexity I often hear from
patients who agonize over whether an act
of kindness or charity was quote truly
selfless they worry that noticing any
selfish motivation whatsoever within
such an act will negate the value of
their actions or mean that they lack a
true self altogether and that they're
really only capable of uh manipulation
or
exploitation these concerns are often
rooted in stigmatizing portrayals of NPD
that they've seen online but the
distress that they create often reflects
a deeper difficulty tolerating
ambiguity the truth is all acts of
Charity have a selfish component it
would be impossible for it to be
otherwise and that's okay kind actions
also bring you feelings of fulfillment
or satisfaction and just because it
feels good to be kind doesn't negate the
possibility of true kindness the problem
only arises when we impose a polarized
All or Nothing lens onto the experience
demanding Purity in a way that ends up
disconnecting us from our
complexity identity thought feeling and
behavior are not dichotomous they're the
products of of dynamic influences
authenticity and inauthenticity are
always intertwined you might be
wondering then what is the value of
diagnosis why even engage in
self-reflection if we can't ever fully
know the truth about our internal world
to a certain extent within each of us
there exists a subjective world that is
forever unknowable to other people so we
work with abstractions tools like case
studies or statistical analysis and
theoretical models there are limits to
what we can know about each other and
there are also limits to what we can
know about ourselves but this doesn't
make self-reflection
feudal on the contrary it challenges us
to become more comfortable with
ambiguity and imperfection and not
knowing paradoxically it's often within
this acceptance of the unknown that we
find both meaning and Beauty every
internal experience contains a blend of
good and bad authentic and inauthentic
true and false psychological Health
involves tolerating this complexity
rather than attempting to strip the self
of
contradiction in fact many forms of
psychological distress arise from
exactly that attempt to rid the self of
ambivalence and reduce complex
experience to a single solitary veilance
we call this black and white thinking
all or nothing thinking or polarized
thinking and when such processes occur
at the level of identity we call it
splitting healing shouldn't involve
passing judgment on what is right or
wrong true or false it's more about
gradually discovering what feels
meaningful and true not in a binary
sense but as part of a richer more
intricate tapestry of experience now I'm
aware that even in what I'm saying here
there's contradiction on the one hand
i'm discussing theories and models that
categorize internal experience on the
other hand I'm emphasizing that such
categorization is ultimately incomplete
and that psychological maturity and
health involves learning to hold
complexity and ambivalence so how can
these ideas be reconciled like I said
earlier it's both and not either or
psychological theories and models help
us to approximate how the mind seems to
work but if we attempt to dissect our
own subjectivity in search of definitive
truths we will inevitably reach an
impass that's the nature of being a
subject a self if you were an object
then such dissection would be simple but
you're a subject a dynamic evolving
process that can't be reduced to Parts
by EMB rcing both what we can know and
the Mystery of what we cannot we move
closer to the fullness of what it means
to be
human Okay so that's it for this week if
you'd like to receive insights like this
on a weekly basis consider becoming a
paid member of the channel your support
is deeply appreciated and helps me
continue creating content like this
until next time take good care
[Music]hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eatonson
welcome to heal NPD in his essay of
anger the Renaissance philosopher
Michelle de montaigne writes about a
nobleman named piso who was known for
his passionate anger
when one of the men under piezo's
command went missing Piezo sentenced
another man under his command to die on
the charge of murder
but on the day of the execution the
missing man was found and the
Executioner took both men to see piso
now everyone thought that Pisa would be
overjoyed and that the charges against
The Condemned man would be dropped
because clearly he was not guilty of
murder but instead the opposite happened
piso sentenced all three men to die
first because he'd already been
condemned to death the second the one
who'd been missing but was then found he
was sentenced to death because according
to Piezo his going missing in the first
place was the cause of the first man's
death and the Executioner was sentenced
to death because he'd failed to carry
out pizzo's original orders
[Music]
so today's episode is about narcissistic
rage and the story of piso has been
cited as an example of this phenomenon
when proven wrong Pisa was unable to see
beyond the shame and humiliation that he
felt and the pressure to get away from
those feelings caused him to overreact
to assert his authority over those who
had embarrassed him
such overreactions are compensatory
they're designed to restore a kind of
balance or equilibrium inside the person
in response to the threat of internal
collapse or fragmentation
more severe overreactions typically
suggest a higher degree of disorder and
more fragile internal organization
but what actually causes narcissistic
rage is it a reflection of grandiosity
of entitlement of arrogance or is it
about an inability to tolerate flaws and
Imperfections
while to some extent it's usually all of
the above
part of the issue is that narcissistic
rage is caused by fundamental confusion
between the self and other people and it
represents a defense against the
feelings of helplessness humiliation and
shame
for this episode I'll mostly be
referencing the work of Ernest wolf he
was a frequent collaborator of Heinz
kohut and author of the book treating
the self elements of clinical
self-psychology
now according to Wolf narcissistic rage
is directed at self objects who pose a
threat to the self or who have caused
damage to the self
you may recall from earlier episodes the
term self object it's a clinical term
for a person place or thing or even a
concept that's used to define the
experience of self
we all have and use self objects
especially when we're young our
self-objects tend to be people mom dads
siblings other caretakers self-object
experiences from these people from Early
Childhood tend to be tangible and
Hands-On they tend to include
experiences like holding caressing
cuddling
Etc the quality of these early
interactions helps to Define our
experience of selfhood the way we're
treated by these self-objects it tells
us who we are and what we're worth and
it's important to understand that early
self-objects aren't experienced by
children as separate other people Mom
Dad Etc are actually experienced by
young children as parts or extensions of
the self and this is partly because
children are incredibly egocentric they
haven't developed a stable enough sense
of self to individuate that is separate
psychologically from those around them
and that's partly why early
relationships have such power over
shaping our identity
but as we grow and the self-consolidates
into a more cohesive and well-defined
whole
self-object experiences tend to become
more abstract instead of using other
people as self-objects adults who have a
stable and positive sense of self tend
to develop abstract self-object
relationships with things like their
role in a community their profession
their identification with political
ideologies or their religious beliefs
since self-objects are experienced as
extensions of the self it's pathological
for adults to continue using other
people as self-objects like they did
when they were children
but in pathological narcissism and NPD
the self has been wounded at an early
age and this wounding has created
vulnerabilities and fragilities in the
structure of the self
the self is unable to sort of stand on
its own two feet the person tends to
rely on the kinds of self objects that
we all used as children they may need
other people to actively admire or
idealize them they may have a basic
confusion between self and other
treating other people as extensions of
self the drawback to having such porous
inters psychic boundaries is that the
words and actions of other people
continue to have tremendous impact on
the experience of self someone with
pathological narcissism or NPD tends to
pursue positive self-object experiences
with a kind of Relentless pressure but
they'll also seek to eliminate bad
self-object experiences with an equal
fervor according to Wolf when a
self-object no longer fulfills the
function of sustaining the self and
instead is making the self feel helpless
there's a need inside the narcissist to
eliminate the offending self-object
it isn't enough to Simply ignore the
offending self-object it isn't enough to
communicate anger and then let it go
because the self-object is experienced
as a part or extension of the self it
must be eliminated or it will continue
to threaten the stability of the self
this attempt to eliminate or expel the
offending self-object is the reason for
the alarming overreactions and the
intensity that often characterizes
narcissistic rage wolf writes the self
feels helpless vexed and mortified that
is paralyzed while agitated to the
extreme and in deathly danger of losing
its integrity
such as self-state is unbearable and
must be altered the offending
self-object of the totally ashamed self
must be made to disappear violently if
necessary even if the whole world Goes
Up in Flames
he goes on to say that the origin of
narcissistic rage must be sought in the
childhood experience of utter
helplessness vis-a-vis the humiliating
self-object
such experiences of helplessness are
unbearably painful because they threaten
the very continuity and existence of the
self and they therefore evoke the
strongest emergency defense in the form
of narcissistic rage end quote
wolf is saying that the origins of
narcissistic rage can be found in the
very early experiences of helplessness
and humiliation that became a part of
the fabric from which the self is woven
these early experiences of humiliation
or helplessness had such a profound
impact because they occurred at a time
when the very Foundation of selfhood was
being laid
they become constant threats to the
structure of self-experience they're
easily triggered and difficult to manage
in some ways it's similar to the ways
that traumatic experience can be
triggered and that's because these early
experiences of humiliation and
helplessness are in fact a form of
relational trauma that has disrupted
psychological and emotional development
wounded in this way the self is unable
to develop a central stability and a
basic positivity the person is
constantly struggling with these
poisonous feelings and constantly
managing the internal threat that they
represent
and this leads to distortions and
self-experience and self-image
to compensate for the shame humiliation
and helplessness a self-image that is
unrealistically positive even idealized
is often constructed but it's prone to
collapse because it's not based in
reality the threat of collapse then
causes the person to press even harder
into the grandiosity to pressure those
around them even more to help prop up
this false compensatory self-image
but this leads others to eventually
abandon the narcissistic person and that
sends them spiraling into the underlying
shame and humiliation that everything
was constructed to cover over in the
first place over time a sort of
intolerance to this cycle of inflation
and collapse develops within the
narcissistic individual
unable to recognize that the
vulnerability lies inside their own self
they continue to rely on those around
them to live up to idealized
expectations and to deliver idealizing
self-object experiences that are
designed to keep the self in working
order
when a self-object fails to do this
which exposes The Narcissist to that old
buried shame and triggers that old
relational trauma the response is often
narcissistic rage now this rage is
usually directed at the offending
self-object a spouse a family member
sometimes a co-worker and this is
because self-objects are typically those
who are close to the narcissistic
individual it's unusual for that sort of
Rage to be directed at someone they
don't know or at someone they would
otherwise seek to impress the rage can
be so overwhelming and so intense
because it's born of a fundamental
confusion between self and other
the narcissist is holding those around
them accountable for an issue that
they've been trying and failing to cope
with their entire lives
but in a state of collapse this rage can
also be directed at the self which can
be experienced as deficient humiliating
and ashamed
and this is where self-harm sometimes
becomes a significant risk for
narcissistic individuals such rage can
also be expressed in the moment but for
many individuals there can also be a
delay of days weeks months or even years
between the offending incident and the
expression of the Rage or the anger
about that incident
painful memory becomes a slow boiling
resentment it can be expressed in the
form of violent outbursts or coldly
calculating destructiveness it can look
like screaming physical violence smug
callousness or a cold shoulder that
makes the offending self-object feel
like they're invisible unimportant
useless or barely tolerated it can also
be expressed toward the original
offending self-object the person who
originally caused the wound in the self
but it's more often expressed much later
toward a substitute self-object someone
who fails the individual in a manner
that's reminiscent of the original wound
the developers of the pathological
narcissism inventory which is a recent
assessment that measures both grandiose
and vulnerable facets of pathological
narcissism use the term entitlement rage
to describe this phenomenon
interestingly though they don't place
this index on the grandiose scale
instead they see entitlement rage as a
reflection of vulnerability
and that's because entitled expectations
represent a deficit in the person's
ability to recognize the difference
between the self and other people
individuals with pathological narcissism
hold other people accountable for their
own feelings and vulnerabilities they
become enraged when others don't
magically anticipate the narcissistic
individual's needs thoughts and feelings
and this isn't so much because the
person thinks that other people should
serve them as it is because the person
engages in a sort of constant projection
a constant egocentrism just like
children can be egocentric they assume
that everyone feels the way they do they
assume that everyone sees the world from
their perspective and this assumption is
often implicit if you were to ask
someone with pathological narcissism or
NPD if they understand that other people
have separate perspectives they would of
course say yes but their actions and
assumptions about the world tell a
different story they know cognitively
that other people have different
perspectives but that awareness hasn't
been allowed to impact to their
unconscious assumptions and that's
because of deficits and damage in the
structure of the self
entitlement rage stems from this
underlying deficit on the surface it may
seem like the person is angry because
you didn't do exactly what they expected
or wanted you to do but if we translate
that anger at an unconscious level it's
more like you've made them feel
powerless and unimportant and expose
them to incredibly painful feelings of
Shame and inadequacy that they don't
know how to cope with and because
they're confused about where you stop
and they begin their feelings of
disappointment become flaws in you that
they can't tolerate so they feel they
must punish you perhaps severely in
order to re-establish an internal
equilibrium within their self
now I want to be crystal clear I'm not
saying that anyone should tolerate abuse
or mistreatment just because we can
understand the painful and even tragic
origins of this sort of behavior doesn't
mean it's okay
every Behavior has a cause and me
pointing out one possible explanation
for narcissistic rage is not the same
thing as me making apologies for it or
telling people in abusive relationships
to roll over and give the person one
more chance I can't tell you how many
times people have confused my analysis
of the psychology behind narcissism with
me making some kind of apology for
abusive mistreatment of other people if
you're being abused seek help and seek
support if you've been abused and you're
no longer in contact with that person or
you're in recovery or you're trying to
heal please know that this video is not
meant to undermine invalidate or quote
Gaslight your experience there are
millions of individuals in the world
with some variation of pathological
narcissism they aren't all identical
your experiences may vary as a society I
think we should strive to view mental
illness through a compassionate lens but
as individuals we're each empowered to
do what's necessary within the bounds of
the law to protect our rights to
physical and emotional safety I've
learned that I need to be extremely
explicit about that because there's so
much pain and so much confusion out
there surrounding this disorder
okay so how is narcissistic rage
addressed in treatment well according to
Wolf what the self needs is to be
understood
however that doesn't mean that the self
needs approval of its rage it may take a
very long time of just soaking up
empathic understanding alone before a
gradual fading away of the rage takes
place
a similar sentiment can be found in the
2020 paper by Glenn gabbard and Holly
crisp entitled principles of
psychodynamic treatment for patients
with narcissistic personality disorder
the self must be allowed to heal and
that healing takes time it also takes
understanding and something called
empathic witnessing
part of what makes the wound so
intolerable is the feeling of being
Invisible unacknowledged invalidated by
the very self-objects who inflicted the
wound in the first place
their refusal to acknowledge the harm
done becomes the narcissistic
individual's inability to validate or
even see that wound inside of themselves
and this is where therapy comes into
play one of the central roles of a
therapist treating pathological
narcissism is to provide empathic
Attunement and validation which is
different than gratification a therapist
should not gratify narcissistic rage
they should not agree with it and
support its pathological expression
rather they should validate the
underlying pain that produces it and
help the person to gradually be able to
recognize the wound itself and to
tolerate the self's pain without needing
to project that pain onto those around
them and this is a process that really
takes two people
but what if you don't have access to a
therapist right now how can you work
toward easing the reactivity inside of
yourself that results in expressions of
narcissistic rage
well I'm reminded of a book that I read
when I was in training called The Four
Agreements by Don Miguel Ruiz in which
he advises the reader to never take
anything personally he writes don't take
anything personally what others say and
do is a projection of their own reality
their own dream
when you're immune to the opinions and
the actions of others you won't be the
victim of needless suffering
good advice
perhaps easier said than done
but that doesn't mean you can't begin to
prioritize not taking things personally
it'll take some time maybe a long time
but you can start working on this today
right now
the things that other people do are
reflections of their choices their
thoughts their feelings their
motivations almost nobody does anything
because of you
that's both good and bad news
it means you're less important than
perhaps you feel you need to be
but it also means you don't need to take
on the failures of other people nor do
you need to worry that their failure to
consider you is somehow a reflection on
your own worth
focus on reinforcing the line between
you and others make it a conscious
practice to try to perceive the
separateness of those around you your
thoughts and feelings belong to you
their thoughts and feelings belong to
them
if you feel ashamed or embarrassed maybe
it isn't because anybody wanted you to
feel that way
maybe those feelings are old maybe they
go way way back and maybe you don't have
to keep reliving the trauma in your
current relationships
okay so that's it for today as always
please leave comments questions
suggestions for future topics and please
consider giving this a like or a
subscribe if you found it helpful and
until next time take good care
[Music]
foreignhi everyone my name is mark evans i'm
author of the book unmasking narcissism
a guide to understanding the narcissist
in your life i'm also a licensed
psychologist in the states of california
in new york and i have a private
practice with a focus on treating and
writing about narcissism and related
disorders you can find a list of my
publications and more information about
me and my work on my website at
www.dreatonson.com
it's my hope that by the end of this
presentation you'll have a new
appreciation for narcissism as a mental
illness as opposed to the stigmatized
media representations with which we're
all familiar something that i call
popular narcissism
so let's get started
the public has a one-dimensional view of
narcissism that's been shaped over the
last 40 years by popular media
representations and by the dsm itself
and for those who may not be familiar
with the dsm that's the official manual
used by clinicians in the united states
to diagnose mental disorders the dsm is
currently in its fifth revision called
the dsm-5 published in 2013.
the popular understanding of narcissism
as a disorder of too much self-love goes
back at least 30 years
here's one study from 1991 where
researchers asked participants to think
about the three most narcissistic people
they know and then to describe everyday
actions that reflect that person's
narcissism
participants reported every day
narcissistic activities like looking in
the mirror bragging and putting other
people down
now for the most part their descriptions
corresponded to narcissistic themes like
exhibitionism grandiosity and
self-centeredness
basically the participants echoed what
we all probably think of when we think
about narcissists
where do we get these ideas
how do we know what we know about
narcissism
well those ideas are shaped by the media
which in turn is shaped by our
expectations it's a feedback loop
creating a commonly held picture of what
narcissism is
so to demonstrate here are a few
narcissists from popular movies and
television shows
see if they line up with your
understanding of what narcissism really
is the first is gaston from disney's
beauty and the beast
he's vain self-absorbed envious he's
grandiose aggressive manipulative and
morally hollow next is miranda priestly
from the devil wears prada she has low
empathy she's arrogant cruel judgmental
shallow and demeaning or devaluing to
other people around her gregory house
from the tv show house he has low
empathy he's grandiose demeaning and
arrogant
regina george from the movie mean girls
she's vain arrogant attention seeking
admiration seeking entitled and cruel
and finally the queen from disney's snow
white now for some reason disney is big
on narcissistic villains
she's vain envious entitled she needs
constant admiration and she's cruel
notice that almost all of these
characters are villains and it's not
just selection bias i could have pulled
in a number of other characters and the
ratio of villains to heroes really
wouldn't change
walter white
joffrey baratheon gilderoy lockhart
even nate shelley from ted lasso
arguably one of the more realistic
portrayals of npd in popular media is
still a sort of villain
it's simply how we as a culture
conceptualize this disorder
in the popular consciousness
narcissists are villains
by and large they're portrayed as evil
manipulative scheming
and incredibly into themselves
lately the popular literature on
narcissism has taken an ugly turn with
the rise of narcissistic abuse
literature
here are some titles and as i go through
these keep in mind that these are
supposed to be mental health resources
describing a mental illness
first there's becoming the narcissist
nightmare how to devalue and discard the
narcissist while supplying yourself
this book has four and a half stars on
amazon.com with over 2 000 reviews
it's also one of the top 10 books in the
personality disorders category in the
amazon kindle store
next we have how to kill a narcissist
note the inflammatory language used in
these titles they're designed to capture
a reader in a certain kind of embattled
mindset in which it feels as though
there's a contest for the right to
survive and thrive
this is actually a common feeling that
individuals experience when they're in a
relationship with someone who has
borderline or narcissistic personality
disorder
however the answer isn't to fuel that
feeling and exploit it for book sales
such an approach only feeds into a
problematic and ultimately dehumanizing
perspective
at any rate like any lurid headline
designed to appeal to our most basic
survival instincts books like these sell
even if they keep people trapped in a me
versus the narcissist mindset
[Music]
next there's gaslighting the
narcissist's favorite tool of
manipulation
which is currently number two in the
personality disorders category on amazon
and finally my personal favorite
exorcism purging the narcissist from
heart and soul
and the cover on this one looks more
like a gothic horror novel than a book
about mental health
this is where we are at with respect to
the popular literature on narcissism
this book by the way also has four and a
half stars on amazon
now there are of course other titles
that are less inflammatory and that
attempt to help people increase their
understanding and compassion for both
themselves and the narcissist in their
lives
a tone that seems much more befitting
the topic of mental health and dealing
with mental illness
in the last 10 or so years popular
narcissism has become a legitimate
cultural phenomenon
now these are the current 50 bestsellers
in the amazon.com personality disorders
category
some of the titles i just showed you are
sitting on this list
in fact 19 of the top 50 titles on
personality disorders are about
narcissism that's 38
nearly four times the number we would
expect if all personality disorders
received equal attention
basically a lot of people are reading
about narcissism but most of them are
reading titles that stigmatize this
disorder and portray narcissists as evil
villains
and it's not just books
there are an increasing number of
youtube videos and facebook communities
that are dedicated to the narcissist as
villain paradigm now you might be
thinking
okay
so maybe narcissists are getting
portrayed as villains
well aren't they i mean where's the
mistake
and if you only went by the dsm-5
description for narcissistic personality
disorder
you'd be right take a look at the dsm
diagnostic criteria for npd
grandiosity entitlement arrogance
exploitation
lack of empathy
the official description of npd
fits the characters i showed you earlier
to a t
but here's the big question
is this a description of mental illness
notice there's no mention of suffering
no emotional distress no internal
conflict only entitlement manipulation
grandiosity
truly
this is a person who would be easy to
hate
but is this really what narcissism is in
the may 2015 edition of the american
journal of psychiatry the authors
conclude that the dsm-5 definition of
narcissism provides a narrow
and homogeneous definition of
narcissistic personality disorder
that it doesn't describe the variety of
individuals who present with
narcissistic issues and that it
completely ignores core features of the
disorder like vulnerable self-esteem
feelings of inferiority emptiness and
perhaps most importantly distress
and this wasn't the first article in a
peer-reviewed journal that pointed out
how inadequate the dsm definition of
narcissism actually is people have been
writing about this for over 30 years
in fact when the american psychiatric
association was writing the dsm-5
they almost threw npd out altogether
because the current diagnostic
description is so problematic
they decided to keep it
but they also put together a work group
to come up with an alternative
here's what they came up with their
alternative definition starts off by
mentioning impairment
so already
we're heads and shoulders above the
current criteria that make no mention of
impairment conflict or distress
they define npd as impairment across at
least two of the following four
areas of personality functioning
identity
self-direction
empathy
and intimacy
for identity
they say that narcissists have an
unstable identity based on the reactions
of other people and that their
self-esteem bounces around between
extremes of high and low for
self-direction
narcissists are stuck chasing other
people's approval
they have trouble setting their own
goals and they tend to see themselves
through an extreme lens
where they're either exceptional or
worthless it also says that they are
often unaware of their own motivations
which sort of kills the idea that
narcissists are mustache twirling
villains for empathy narcissists have
trouble recognizing how other people
feel because they tend to be very
focused on whether other people approve
of them
this leads them to overestimate or
underestimate how important they are to
other people
now on the one hand that sets the stage
for arrogance
but on the other hand
if you chronically underestimate how
important you are to other people
it sets the stage for depression
and finally intimacy
narcissists have trouble forming deep
connections and bonds with other people
because they're so focused on their own
self-worth
so we've covered how the dsm-5
definition of narcissism is too narrow
how it misses important features of the
disorder like vulnerable self-esteem and
impairments into stress tolerance
how it fails to address underlying
psychological structures that produce
symptoms and how it leaves out any
mention of distress
but there's even more
here are some other problems with the
dsm-5 description of npd
npd was first added as an official
diagnosis to the dsm-3 in 1980
at the time the diagnosis had a broader
more inclusive criteria that was heavily
influenced by psychoanalytic theories
concerning narcissism
the american psychiatric association
removed all reference to dynamic
conflict and emotional distress for npd
when they published the revised version
of the dsm-3 in 1987 because they
thought that the original npd
description was too heavily influenced
by psychoanalytic theory
but they were overzealous
they ended up stripping away everything
that grounded the disorder as an actual
mental illness
and the data support that conclusion
recent studies have looked at the
reliability and validity of the dsm
definition of npd
and they've found that it has low
temporal stability
meaning that when you assess someone one
day and diagnose them with npd they may
not meet the same criteria in a month or
a year
and that's a big problem when it comes
to personality disorders because they're
supposed to be stable over time meaning
they don't easily change
as described in the dsm npd is not
stable because it is little more than a
collection of surface level traits it
doesn't address underlying psychological
structures that produce those traits npd
also has extremely low prevalence rates
some studies have found less than one
percent of people meet the descriptive
criteria for it
it is actually the least diagnosed of
all personality disorders
even though it's over represented in
popular media and on amazon hardly
anyone in the real world qualifies for
the disorder as it is currently
described in the dsm finally it has low
clinical utility
as a construct npd simply isn't very
useful
narcissists in a grandiose state
don't seek treatment
and the dsm makes it impossible to
diagnose a narcissist who is not in a
grandiose state something we'll discuss
later
as a result most therapists outside of
certain settings like prisons simply do
not diagnose people with npd
so we have a diagnosis that doesn't
describe a person who is mentally ill
that doesn't hold up consistently over
time
that is exceedingly rare in the general
population and that therapists don't
ever use except in very limited settings
like prison how did this happen most of
what we know about narcissism we know
from research using one instrument
the npi
the npi was made using the dsm
description for narcissism
and 77 percent of all research done on
narcissism since the 1980s has used it
all versions of the npi focus only on
grandiose narcissism in other words the
version of narcissism that is
exceedingly rare and doesn't include any
emotional suffering or distress
increasingly researchers agree that the
npi does not actually measure mental
illness
instead it measures traits that are
arguably adaptive in the right settings
here's a description from the team that
developed the test
according to them the npi identifies
people who are energetic extroverted and
experience seeking
grandiose in their conception of
themselves and that others often see
them as egotistical and conceited the
npi
the main instrument used to research
narcissism
doesn't describe mental illness
it describes steve jobs or any number of
highly successful business leaders
was steve jobs narcissistic
probably
did he have a personality disorder
i don't know maybe
but he was also an effective leader and
a visionary who changed the world
and this is the issue with the npi and
arguably the last 30 odd years of
narcissism research that uses it
npi scores are rarely associated with
other hallmarks of serious mental
illness and distress
and that's why we tend to think of
narcissists as not really mentally ill
in short
the last 30 odd years of research into
narcissism using the npi
may be fatally flawed
which means that we may know next to
nothing about narcissismhi everyone welcome back this is part
two of this video series part one lays
the foundation for expanding the current
diagnostic paradigm for npd you can find
a link to that video in the description
part two will focus on developing a more
comprehensive and compassionate model
for npd that includes both grandiose and
vulnerable dimensions of the disorder
the dsm and the npi form a feedback loop
where the dsm provides the description
and the npi provides the data that
supports new versions of the dsm
these constructs are referenced by
authors and screenwriters to create
fictional representations of narcissists
as villains and to prop up the
narcissistic abuse market that produces
titles like how to kill a narcissist
have you ever heard any other legitimate
mental health disorder talked about this
way
think about it for a second what if
depression or anxiety
were treated the same way that
narcissism is treated ironically when it
comes to narcissism we all may be
suffering from a lack of empathy
okay so the dsm is wrong and the npi is
wrong and popular media is wrong
then who's right and just what the heck
is narcissism the concept of narcissism
dates all the way back to the early 20th
century and a famous paper by freud
himself but the latter half of the 20th
century saw narcissism become an
extremely important concept in
psychology and that's because narcissism
is considered to be one of two polls
around which personality develops
there's the relationship poll how we
relate to others and there's the
narcissism poll how we relate to
ourselves in other words self-image
there is such a thing as healthy or
adaptive narcissism
that means that you've developed a
healthy stable and realistic self-image
and there's such a thing as unhealthy or
pathological narcissism where the
self-image is damaged or distorted it
can be distorted in a positive direction
which causes grandiosity
or and here's the clincher in a negative
direction
that gives you unrealistically negative
self-images that are unstable and in
constant danger of collapse
this is called vulnerable narcissism and
it is just starting to get recognized
but i would argue that it is ten times
more common than grandiose narcissism
these are the narcissists that
therapists see in their practices only
they don't recognize them as narcissists
they call them depressed or anxious or
bipolar
now i'm not saying that every depressed
person is a narcissist far from it
what i'm saying is that underlying
personality dysfunction
produces symptoms for vulnerable
narcissists those symptoms are often
mistaken for more familiar forms of
mental illness like depression
essentially when a person spends
exorbitant amounts of time and energy
attempting to maintain a positive
self-image and they go about doing so in
inflexible and maladaptive ways we call
that pathological narcissism
and contemporary research looks at the
interplay between two factors
narcissistic grandiosity and
narcissistic vulnerability
these terms simply describe the manner
in which a person is going about
attempting to manage their self-esteem
the vulnerable face of narcissism is
what has been missing from our
diagnostic picture and our national
discussion about this disorder
vulnerable narcissism involves the
conscious experience of helplessness
emptiness low self-esteem and shame
in other words
this guy
narcissus of ancient greek mythology is
the original narcissist the disorder is
named after him
he's often portrayed as gazing adoringly
at his own reflection
and people mistakenly believe that this
means he is vain or in love with himself
and while it is technically true that he
was in love with himself he believed he
was in love with another person
every time he attempted to touch this
ideal person that he saw in the water it
would vanish
our culture gets hung up on the fact
that he was in love with his own image
but that's not the point
the point is that he wasted his life in
pursuit of an illusion a fantasy of
perfection that ultimately led to
depression despair and emptiness
while many of us have heard the
beginning of this myth most haven't
heard the end where he dies from
starvation on the bank of the river
morrison writes the mirror image
fragmented each time narcissus reached
out to embrace it causing him to pine
away in melancholy and ultimately to die
the original narcissist was more
vulnerable than arrogant more depleted
and desperate than full of himself
the story of narcissus like the disorder
that bears his name
is a tragedy
as it turns out disney's beauty and the
beast had two narcissistic characters
gaston is the one everyone thinks of
he's the grandiose narcissist he lines
up almost perfectly with the dsm
definition and the popular image of
narcissism but what you didn't realize
is that the beast is also a narcissist
he has a damaged self-image
he obsessively ruminates about his
appearance he constantly compares
himself to an idealized image of himself
as a younger prince and then jealously
guards the withering rose he sees as his
last connection to that image of
perfection
he's hypersensitive to criticism easily
angered and he hides his true feelings
for fear of being rejected originally he
only allows bell to stay in the castle
because he thinks it will reverse the
spell and make him beautiful again
he's using her to salvage his
self-esteem
arguably compared to gaston the beast is
the more mentally ill and by that i mean
he's more symptomatic
gaston is very well defended by his
grandiosity but like the castle in which
he lives the beast is falling apart
and that's what we mean by vulnerable
narcissism
so what does vulnerable narcissism
actually look like
well it's not as easy to hate
vulnerable narcissism is correlated with
depression anxiety substance abuse and
even suicide
as i mentioned before contemporary
research looks at the interplay between
grandiosity and vulnerability
these terms simply describe how a person
is attempting to manage their unstable
self-esteem it's important to underscore
that these are not mutually exclusive
types of narcissist
rather than a cold faucet and a hot
faucet
think of a combined faucet where
grandiosity and vulnerability mixed
together depending on the situation a
2010 article in the annual review of
clinical psychology a peer-reviewed
journal said it best
the core feature of pathological
narcissism is not grandiosity but rather
defective self-esteem regulation leading
to grandiose and vulnerable self and
affect states so individuals with
pathological narcissism fluctuate
between grandiosity and vulnerability
some may spend more time in a grandiose
state while others may spend more time
in a vulnerable state
it depends on how well defended the
individual is
grandiosity is a defensive distortion
that occurs in response to deeply held
feelings of inferiority envy anger and
shame
when the grandiose defenses break down
the underlying vulnerable self-image is
exposed
for some narcissists this rarely if ever
happens
while others live their lives in a near
constant state of breakdown
most float somewhere in between
that being said if a patient in a
vulnerable narcissistic state did walk
into a therapist consulting room how
would they diagnose them
well it's currently not possible to
diagnose a patient whose narcissistic
presentation is predominantly vulnerable
such a patient could plausibly receive
any combination of the following
diagnoses all of them could be
technically accurate but still miss the
essential problem
so what are the common core features of
narcissism
what should a clinician look for to
diagnose a narcissist well here's a list
of common features
a few of these overlap with the dsm-5
criteria but most of them don't
instead they're taken from clinical and
research literature first there's
interpersonal exploitativeness
and that's the tendency to use others
whether intentionally or unintentionally
in the service of self-esteem
maintenance
there's self-sacrificing
self-enhancement and that's the tendency
to perform
charitable deeds or give people
compliments or do good things for others
in the hopes that it will reflect
positively on the narcissistic
individual
grandiose fantasy
that's the belief that one is better
than others or more deserving
the important points here are that this
belief can be conscious or unconscious
and that it is fundamentally
compensatory meaning that it's used to
prop up underlying unstable self-esteem
there's contingent self-esteem
that's the tendency to base self-image
and self-esteem on the reactions of
others
this is why narcissists can appear
overly sensitive and easily wounded
hiding the self that's the tendency to
hide authentic thoughts needs and
feelings from other people for fear that
they will lead to traumatic rejection
and abandonment
devaluing that's when an individual
feels like they're better than others or
they cast other people aside when those
people no longer serve a self-esteem
maintenance function
and by the way a narcissist can also
devalue themselves
which leads to depressive episodes and
even suicide entitlement rage
narcissists tend to react to any
perceived threat with defensive rage
sometimes the rage is turned outwards
toward others
but sometimes the rage is directed
inward and they attack and devalue
themselves for not being good enough
emptiness this is based on something
called identity diffusion which is
common in people with personality
disorders there's a feeling of inner
emptiness because they lack a stable
integrated sense of self chronically
fragmenting self
narcissists base their self image on
unrealistic ideas of being perfect
it's thought that they do this because
of early relational trauma that occurred
at a time when they were attempting to
create a realistic self-image
because of this trauma they're stuck
with a self-image that is unrealistic
and that falls apart easily which we
call fragmentation
when this happens the narcissist tumbles
into a terrifying world filled with
something a famous psychoanalyst named
donald winicott called primitive agonies
these are experiences of unthinkable
anxiety that occasionally lead to
substance abuse or violence or even
suicide perfectionism and idealization
this is the tendency to feel that one
either is or must be perfect
and the tendency to idealize other
people as extensions of the
idealized perfect self
it's thought that this occurs when
children are not shown through warmth
and acceptance that they will still be
loved even if they aren't perfect
and finally shame
often called the underbelly of
narcissism
shame is the feeling that one's entire
self is bad unwanted or unworthy
it's a toxic experience that leads
people to become at odds with themselves
shame breeds both grandiosity as a
defense and depression when the
idealized self that is created to combat
shame fails to live up to its promise
i hope that by now it's clear that
narcissism is much more than a preening
peacock or an evil stepmother
although to be fair it can be both of
those things but more often it's the
quietly depressed or anxious person who
feels they can never live up to their
own unrealistic standards it's the guy
who seems to have everything but
suddenly shoots himself because he was
carrying around a broken self-image and
he felt he never lived up to who he was
supposed to be it's the child who was
emotionally neglected by self-absorbed
parents and grew up relying on fantasies
of self-sufficiency when that child
tries to make it as an adult in the
world they feel chronically invisible
empty depressed and angry narcissism is
a fortress built around deep emotional
wounds whether the fortress is
functioning well or falling apart
all who struggle with narcissism carry
deep emotional pain in their core
the author stephen johnson calls
narcissists used children these are
people whose most basic needs for
consistent love and mirroring were
denied or distorted when they were young
the vast majority of people who we would
call narcissistic are not manipulative
villains looking for the next victim
they're like people drowning in the sea
who will blindly step on another
person's head out of the sheer panic of
feeling like they're about to go under
they're like starving people who are so
hungry for something to sustain their
fragile self-image that they can think
of little else
their self-centeredness is about
survival not an abundance of self-love
nevertheless
narcissism remains one of the few mental
health issues that is still openly
mocked derided and equated with evil
in the last 10 years a number of studies
have been looking at these issues
eventually producing a measure that
actually seems to be a huge improvement
over the npi
it's called the pathological narcissism
inventory and it's a full spectrum
measure that assesses both grandiose and
vulnerable dimensions of narcissism it's
also correlated with other measures of
emotional distress
variable self-esteem and hallmarks of
significant personality pathology
in other words
we're finally approaching a definition
of narcissism as a mental illness
as opposed to a moral or character
defect
the current dsm model of npd arguably
does more harm than good it contributes
to diagnostic and research confusion
while indirectly supporting a growing
industry based on vilification and
stigmatization of a vulnerable
population
while some individuals with npd may
present in accordance with the dsm
criteria
research suggests that this is rare and
that many narcissistic individuals seek
treatment experiencing intense feelings
of worthlessness depression anxiety
interpersonal problems inconsistent
self-image shame substance abuse and
suicidality such individuals are not
served by a skewed and inaccurate
diagnostic model nor are they helped by
public fear and antagonism
it's time to rethink the dominant
diagnostic paradigm pertaining to
narcissism in hopes that such revisions
will have a positive effect on the
widespread stigma relating to this form
of mental illness
thanks for joining me i've included the
references for this video in the
description
if you have any questions or comments
feel free to leave them in the comment
section below
if you'd like to learn more about
narcissism and related topics you can
visit my website at
www.dreatonson.com take carehi everyone I'm Dr eatonson welcome to
heal NPD today I'd like to talk about a
concept called self as object
essentially individuals with
pathological narcissism don't relate to
themselves as a subject as a human
person who experiences thoughts and
feelings that are valid and important in
their own right
instead narcissists typically relate to
themselves as an object a thing that is
either doing well and therefore worth
something or not doing well and
therefore worthless
foreign
[Music]
people with pathological narcissism and
NPD tend to be preoccupied with concerns
about self-worth
the self is either experienced as in
alignment with an internal image of
perfection sometimes called an ideal
self or an ego ideal or it's experienced
as in some way falling short of that
ideal and therefore judged as worthless
they're seldom and in-between feeling
about the self where it's judged is
simply good enough in narcissism and NPD
notice that when I'm describing this
experience of self I'm using the word it
in many ways individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD
experience themselves as in it as an
object that either performs or is broken
that's either shiny and beautiful and
pleasing to others and therefore of
value or is ugly and unwanted and
therefore worthless
for most narcissists the feelings about
the self are unstable and highly
variable and depending on the level of
instability in the personality the
perception of self can actually shift on
a dime one moment the person is
experiencing the heights of inflated
self-esteem and then the next they're in
the depths of empty depression and
despair this variability in self-image
is partly due to Reliance on certain
reality distorting defenses like
splitting and idealization and
devaluation
as the analyst melon and Klein famously
observed whenever there's a split in the
perception of self there's a
corresponding split in the perception of
objects the polarized lens through which
narcissists see themselves also applies
to other people who are sometimes
similarly viewed as perfect or worthless
but what's the root cause of this
instability
why do narcissists have such a difficult
time relating to themselves and to other
people as people
as irreducible combinations of quote
good and bad parts that have intrinsic
value and worth outside of how well they
measure up to some idealized image of
perfection
the answer lies in the ways that
relational trauma disrupts the
development of the self
when we're very young we don't actually
have a self-image
we sort of exist as a mishmash of
undifferentiated feeling States we're
regularly overwhelmed by intense
feelings of pleasure pain anguish Joy
Blissful merger and terrifying
separation
it's only over time that we begin to
make sense of these experiences perhaps
the first psychological adaptation is
separating pleasure from pain in a
meaningful way
these distinctions build on each other
as we go from infancy through our early
years until we sort of emerge from the
Oblivion of undifferentiated internal
experience around age four a substantial
aspect of this building of self occurs
through repeated interactions with other
people mostly with our caregivers an
infant who's screaming its pain and
discomfort into an empty room isn't
receiving any meaningful feedback about
what's happening and therefore its mind
exists in a kind of chaos but if we
place an empathic caregiver into that
equation one who gently picks the infant
up holds it in their arms who makes
soothing sounds and meaningful
connections with eye contact suddenly
the infant is lifted out of the chaos of
its internal world and it's met with a
being whose internal experience is
actually highly organized and who can
therefore see or find the subjectivity
of the infant we actually can't find
ourselves without the involvement of
other people
in the words of Donald winicot we need
to be found the sorts of experiences
that help infants build a self extend
into early childhood and Beyond kohut's
term for these sorts of experiences was
self-object experiences at first they're
very Hands-On sorts of interactions
suckling at the breast or the bottle
being held being swaddled being cared
for the long periods of unbroken eye
contact that typically occur between a
caregiver and an infant and as we grow
these self-object experiences tend to
become more abstract but throughout
Early Childhood when we're doing the
bulk of the work of building a self they
remain pretty concrete
Toddlers and young children need to be
held hugged and given feedback about
their thoughts and feelings adults need
to get down on their level showing them
that their experience in the world
matters and is important and is
perceptible to another being
all of this is in the service of helping
the child to create an experience of
selfhood that's firmly rooted in their
own subjectivity
they learn to feel their feelings and to
respond to them
and this basic connection to their
Center of being their authenticity is
what makes life and relationships feel
meaningful they develop fluency in their
feelings learning to factor them into
all situations and relationships they're
sort of allowed to have preferences and
tastes desires and feelings that emerge
spontaneously in the context of their
relationships with caregivers and those
around them their experience of being a
self is grounded in subjectivity and not
bound up with problematic and
complicated feelings like shame
humiliation Envy or rage against which
they're forced to defend by learning to
ignore or split off parts of their
subjectivity and their developing self
so now let's contrast this with the
sorts of self-object experiences that
are thought to lead to pathological
narcissism
it's long been observed that narcissists
are typically overvalued in childhood
for some Talent skill or attribute the
classic example would be a child who's
pushed to perform by a parent Who's
acting out their unrealized Ambitions
and attempting to live vicariously
through the child by making them a quote
star
such a parent is typically blind to the
experiences of their child it doesn't
matter to them that the child maybe
doesn't want to be on stage or perform
because the parents too preoccupied with
their own issues to see or discover the
child in this scenario the child is
actually an object to the parent rather
than a self if the parent could see and
relate to the child as a subject as a
self
then they would probably be horrified
that they were creating suffering in the
child to achieve their own ends
of course this kind of dynamic between
caregivers and children is rarely
limited to just one activity or one
Arena of life like performing on stage
such a parent typically treats their
child as an object in multiple areas of
life always pushing never really
listening or perceiving always trying to
quote make the child into something that
pleases the parent never really taking
the time or making the space to discover
or find who the child really is and how
the child really feels
and this failure to connect empathically
to the child is actually a kind of
neglect that impairs the child's ability
to create a strong and meaningful
connection to their own subjectivity it
makes it difficult to develop a sense of
themselves as a person rather than as an
object that is either pleasing or
displeasing to the people on whom they
depend when I work with narcissistic
individuals in Psychotherapy there's
often a profound lack of self-awareness
now to be sure many narcissists have a
keen intellectual awareness of
themselves they're often very good at
watching themselves and judging
themselves and sizing themselves up
especially in comparison to other people
they're often very good at sensing who
or what others need them to be and they
tend to pour themselves into whatever
mold seems available to them in a given
relationship and this is why others will
often experience narcissists as Charming
sensitive intelligent Etc at first and
it's only as the relationship develops
that the individual's emotional
impairments become more obvious
narcissists can be whatever you want or
need them to be they learn to do that in
childhood this to them is what it is to
be a self
the experience of self is inextricably
bound to the approval of others the
child forced onto the stage eventually
learns to act like they want to be there
they learn to mirror the parents need
for them to be a star because acting
like that is what gets noticed and
reinforced day after day this is the
part of them that gets sort of
discovered the only problem is that this
part of them that gets discovered or
found as a self isn't authentic it's
manufactured it's created to please the
parent and then of course the parent
discovers that part of the child because
that's all they were ever really looking
for in the first place the child's
actual authentic selfhood remains
undiscovered often even by the child as
they grow into adulthood this empty
place where an experience of self would
otherwise be becomes a source of
unbearable pain and anguish it's the
feeling of emptiness that individuals
with narcissism often describe
where a self should be there's instead a
void
that's the bad news
but here's the good news that void can
be filled not with grandiosity or
feelings of perfection and alignment
with the ideal self because that never
lasts and not by becoming the quote star
that Mom or Dad or whoever expected you
to be
the void can only be sustainably filled
by an authentic experience of self
and that must be allowed to grow
so if you identify with what I'm
describing it's because you weren't
discovered you weren't found by someone
who cared about you and showed you that
your feelings matter
you weren't treated as a self you were
treated as an object that existed to
gratify somebody else a consumable
Expendable self that's only as good as
it can perform and this is the
Unspeakable pain and shame that lives at
the center of narcissism and it's why
psychologist Stephen Johnson calls
narcissists used children however this
pain can often be a starting point for
developing the experience of self that
you lack
look inside and see what's there if it's
emptiness then go with that what's the
emptiness like how do you feel about it
does it make you feel scared numb angry
whatever you find try to make space for
it try to perceive the being that is
feeling it
you
if you find grief then go with that for
many feelings of grief sadness
disappointment or longing are often the
first strands of authentic
self-experience that can be followed and
don't worry that these nascent parts of
yourself consist mostly of bad feelings
your job is not to feel good it's not to
be shiny perfect or pleasing to anyone
around you your job is simply to be
to exist as a self with an intrinsic
value apart from what you can do or how
you can make anyone else feel you
sustained an injury a long time ago
maybe it wasn't done intentionally maybe
it was nobody's fault whatever the case
you didn't get what you needed you are
allowed to have feelings about that
you're allowed to suffer because of it
and paradoxically it's that very
suffering that might ultimately lead you
to something else
whatever about you may be false
the pain is real
it's undeniably yours and it's proof
that you exist that there's a being
there who feels and that's just the tip
of the iceberg in time that feeling will
lead to other feelings and they won't
all be unpleasant
okay so that's it for today if you like
this episode and you found it helpful
please be sure to hit the like button or
subscribe for more content like this in
the future it really helps with the
metrics and to get this content seed by
a wider audience
until next time take good care
[Music]hi everyone Dr Mark eatonson here
specializing in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and Related
Disorders and today I wanted to make a
short video discussing the phenomenon of
gaslighting this is something that's
often discussed on the internet often in
the same breath as the topic of
narcissism and it's often characterized
as something that the narcissist does
sort of uh
consciously that it's a nefarious
attempt to
destabilize another person by
undermining their faith or trust in
their own ability to perceive reality
correctly in order to give the
narcissist an upper hand and make it so
that they can more effectively
manipulate or coerce or abuse the other
person and I want to be clear that you
know I think that sometimes that's true
I think that sometimes for some people
gaslighting is a conscious intentional
attempt to manipulate somebody else but
I think that when it comes to
personality disorders it's often a
byproduct of how that person is
organized psychologically in other words
that gaslighting is something that sort
of happens and it happens unconsciously
it's not necessarily intentional and
here's what I mean by that
people with personality disorders are
operating in what we would call the
borderline range of Personality
organization and that means that they're
having difficulty perceiving and sort of
holding the boundaries between
themselves and other people and also
that they have difficulty accepting the
reality of the consequences for their
actions they have difficulty
understanding that that consequences
can't just sort of be magically undone
so first blurry boundaries between self
and other this means that people with
NPD will often assume that other people
have feelings and intentions that
correspond with their own feelings and
intentions if they feel sad it must be
because somebody else intended to make
them sad if they feel hurt it must be
because somebody else intended to hurt
them they have difficulty understanding
that other people have their own centers
of emotional gravity
therefore when they do something that
when the narcissistic person does
something that hurts somebody else they
have trouble perceiving the harm done
because they don't feel it themselves
further they assume that the other
person intends to make the person with
NPD feel shame or like a bad person when
they attempt to hold them accountable
and this is why people with NPD will
often launch into an extensive defense
of their own character instead of
apologies or attempts to make amends
they can't track the other person's
emotional experience because it's too
different from their own
uh this will often look like minimizing
or even outright denial of the harm that
they did or the consequences of their
actions
second when it comes to accepting
consequences people with NPD and I'm
talking about the personality disordered
range of functioning care often have a
lot of trouble people in the borderline
range that's the personality disordered
range of functioning haven't yet
developed the ability to accept the
immutability of reality they haven't
learned to let go of magical thinking
when it comes to consequences they
um they haven't learned yet necessarily
uh sort of on an unconscious level that
they can't simply wish away harm that
they've caused that they can't avoid
responsibility by simply not thinking
about something and stuff like that
uh and understand that this is a
regressed way of being in the world uh
from this perspective consequences
haven't quite become real yet reality is
written and then erased and Rewritten uh
depending on how the person with the
personality disorder feels at that
particular moment and this is why people
with personality disorders often have
extreme and seemingly inexplicable
shifts in their perceptions of
themselves and others and situations
people operating in this range they tend
to try to undo their bad actions and
they fully expect that it's possible to
make up for hurting or betraying someone
by telling a funny joke or by giving
them a gift or by you know simply acting
as though the argument or the incident
didn't happen in the first place they
may feel shocked or betrayed or even
angry if someone attempts to hold them
accountable for something they did
because in their mind they already sort
of made up for it by being nice
or if they've moved on from the incident
in their mind then they can't understand
how the other person hasn't also moved
on in their mind again the boundary
between self and other is blurry
so gaslighting happens when the person
with NPD does something to hurt someone
else and then minimizes the extent of
the harm or outright denies that the
harm ever happened in the first place
and it can be crazy making for the other
person but from the person with npd's
point of view the harm that was done has
been magically erased in their own mind
due to their inability to cope with
consequences and their inability to sort
of see and consistently respect that
other people have feelings and thoughts
and experiences that are different from
their own Now understand that this is a
developmental deficit we all go through
a phase of development in which we try
to magically undo our bad behavior
or simply erase our memory of it using a
defense called splitting or another one
called denial
these defenses are part of the normal
set of human psychological defense
mechanisms but most people have grown
Beyond them and entered more mature
levels of Personality organization in
which they can hold on to the memory of
harm done appreciate that other people
have the right to deal with their
feelings at their own pace and that if
somebody holds you accountable it isn't
because they're trying to get one over
on you or rub your nose in it or make
you feel like a bad person or dominate
you it's because you actually harmed
them and they would like for you to make
amends now people in the borderline
range of Personality organization don't
necessarily have those abilities or if
they do then they're inconsistent and
this is why someone with NPD will look
you straight in the eye and outright
deny having done something that you know
very well they did they aren't
necessarily consciously trying to
undermine your perception of reality
it's a byproduct of a developmental
delay within their psychology
clear that I'm not excusing this
behavior I'm not saying it's okay I'm
not attempting to erase other people's
experience of having been harmed or
abused or gas lit maybe intentionally by
another person all I'm doing is saying
that it's not necessarily A nefarious or
conscious attempt on the part of the
other person when there's a personality
disorder involved
okay so uh I hope that helps to clear
some things up please feel free to leave
comments or questions below uh and until
next time take good care all righthi everyone I'm Dr eatonson welcome to
heal NPD so I have a confession to make
until very recently I'd never actually
watched one of Dr romani's videos in its
entirety for one I'm not exactly her
Target demographic but for another her
way of conceptualizing NPD doesn't
really fit with mine but I decided to
make a video about empathy and I watched
one of her videos on the topic as
research suffice it to say that she and
I have some pretty significant
disagreements
[Music]
thank you
[Music]
many people consider low empathy to be a
central diagnostic consideration for
pathological narcissism and NPD
NPD and lack of empathy are so fused in
the popular mind that people often react
with shock and surprise when I inform
them that low or absent empathy is not
actually required for a diagnosis of NPD
for a very large group of people out
there lack of empathy means narcissism
and narcissism means lack of empathy
and this is one reason I was surprised
that Dr romani's video on the topic
claims that individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD don't
actually lack empathy in fact she makes
the argument that people with NPD are
actually gifted when it comes to empathy
they simply choose not to use it in her
words they can't be bothered to extend
empathy toward those with whom they're
close she says and I quote the most
dangerous part is the narcissist
weaponizing empathy they have an
unbelievable ability to study another
person and get the information they need
and turn around and use it to harm that
person
now in my opinion this perspective
invites viewers to go deeper and deeper
into a two-dimensional worldview in
which the problems in their
interpersonal relationships are caused
by intentional Bad actors wolves in
sheep's clothing Who quote weaponize
empathy but is it correct is Dr ramani
right in saying that narcissists are
choosing to weaponize empathy in my
opinion the field needs to decide
whether pathological narcissism and NPD
actually represent a form of mental
illness
and this is an issue I raised uh way
back in my first video titled the
problem with NPD the diagnostic criteria
for NPD focus on superficial attributes
like arrogance grandiosity and
entitlement but notably absent are any
criteria that focus on suffering or
distress that's often experienced by
individuals with NPD
the one dimensionality of the NPD
construct in the DSM supports stigma and
public antagonism toward this population
essentially NPD as described in the DSM
is the disorder if the criteria
focused instead on deficits and
impairments including empty depression
anxiety vulnerable or variable
self-esteem and even suicidality I think
we'd see a different treatment of this
disorder
but which is it is NPD a mental illness
or is it a form of evil
are narcissists suffering or are they
intentional Bad actors who are out to
get people are they secretly empathy
Geniuses like Dr Romani claims who have
simply chosen to quote weaponize empathy
or are they actually impaired and unable
to empathize especially with those who
are close to them for reasons that have
very little to do with conscious
manipulation
well I think you all know my take on
this question of course there are
individuals out there with NPD who
intentionally hurt and manipulate other
people but I would argue that such
individuals are likely good examples of
malignant narcissism which actually
involves a combination of grandiose
narcissism psychopathy sadism and
paranoia I actually made a video about
this personality style and I'll link to
it in the description
but as a rule it's my experience that
individuals with pathological narcissism
aren't usually quote out to get other
people rather they are often like
someone who's drowning and desperately
fighting for air and such an individual
will blindly pull those around them down
to survive
the DSM itself is somewhat inconsistent
on the topic of empathy it says both
that narcissists lack empathy but then
it also says that narcissists are
unwilling to extend empathy toward those
around them
can it possibly be both
well I like answers yes and I'll explain
why here are the four main reasons for
impaired empathy and pathological
narcissism and NPD
number one lack of self-awareness
narcissists are very sensitive to
feeling shame interpersonal dependency
or humiliation this sensitivity causes
them to disavow repress or split off
vulnerable feelings they're often
shockingly unaware of their own
emotional needs and to an extent this
lack of self-awareness is due to
deficits in their early relationships
with caregivers
many individuals with pathological
narcissism and NPD were exploited
emotionally by caregivers and pressured
into developing a Persona that was
pleasing to those around them this
Persona pretends not to have emotional
needs it pretends not to experience
shame doubt longing grief or
disappointment as children most
narcissists were forced to drive such
feelings underground to bury them in
their own unconscious and to cover them
over by a compensatory grandiose false
self we can't see in others what we
can't see in ourselves we can
intellectually understand what other
people might be going through but to
really empathize with them we need to be
able to find similar experiences inside
of ourselves and since narcissists tend
to be defensively organized in such a
way that they exclude those experiences
from their own conscious awareness
they have a difficult time empathizing
with other people
number two objectification of the self
and of other people
as I've discussed in previous videos
including one titled why narcissists
feel empty inside people with
pathological narcissism and NPD don't
typically experience themselves as a
self
instead they tend to experience
themselves as an object that's either
doing well or that's worthless this
objectification of self is actually a
legacy of relational trauma and the
pressure to perform that many
narcissists experienced in childhood
they were not raised in an environment
where their feelings mattered What
mattered was how well they performed how
well they measured up to the
expectations of a caregiver
they were used treated as an object and
this experience became for them the
centerpiece of selfhood empathy requires
perceiving yourself as a subject as a
being with feelings that are valid and
important and that provide meaningful
context to your life if you can't know
about your own feelings then it becomes
very difficult to understand the
feelings of other people
similarly if you can't perceive your own
intrinsic worth as a subject it's
difficult to perceive others as worthy
subjects in pathological narcissism and
NPD everyone The Narcissist included
tends to be treated as an object that's
either good or bad shiny or ugly
valuable or worthless there's little to
no room in that mix for empathy either
for the self or for other people
objects don't require empathy only
subjects do
three narcissists are like someone who's
drowning or someone who's starving
a sort of desperation underlies most of
their experience only it often doesn't
look like desperation it looks like
pressure
to be the best pressure to have the best
pressure to be noticed pressure to be
seen
consciously many narcissists will
disavow that they need anything at all
because the compensatory grandiose self
is built to defend against shame
rejection and humiliation
and therefore any emotional experience
that might render them vulnerable to one
of those terrible feelings you only have
to scratch the surface of the
narcissist's defensive facade to find a
kind of depthless need a terrifying
desperation that's built on profound
interpersonal dependency narcissists
have a damaged sense of self that
requires constant infusions of external
self-esteem
their ability to generate their own
sense of worth their own sense of
meaning and their own sense of self is
impaired they must borrow those
abilities from those around them
and this gets us back to the metaphor of
a drowning or starving person a drowning
person wants only one thing air and a
starving person wants only one thing
food
all of the considerations are
subordinate to that overarching need the
same is true for pathological narcissism
and MPD we need a viable sense of self
to survive and when someone's sense of
self is in a state of collapse they
can't focus on anything not work not
love not responsibilities
Etc it all goes out the window until a
sense of self is restored just like a
starving person's priorities all go out
the window until they get food in a
starving state of mind we're not capable
of empathy we can't place other people
first
try to rescue a drowning person and see
how quickly they pull you under
there's a reason why lifeguards learn to
extend a poll or throw a life preserver
even the most admirable Among Us will
clutch at someone attempting to rescue
them from drowning in such a way that
both lives are often lost
and number four in my own research I
found that pathological narcissism and
NPD are positively correlated with
something called dismissing avoidant and
fearful avoidant attachment styles
attachment styles are characteristic
ways of engaging in relationships with
other people
we developed them very early in life
based on the ways that were treated by
caregivers those with avoidant
attachment Styles learn to sort of turn
the volume down on their own
interpersonal needs because caregivers
are unresponsive punishing or
inconsistent
a famous study looked at the signs of
stress in toddlers who have avoidant
attachment styles
when separated from their caregiver
these toddlers showed no outward signs
of distress they didn't cry they didn't
fuss they didn't even tend to look up
from what they were doing when the
caregiver left the room
but medical readings of stress like
galvanic skin response remained High
these children had learned to suppress
their attachment needs
they were learning to ignore their own
feelings and longitudinal studies show
that avoidant children often grow into
adults who have something called a
dismissing avoidant attachment style
which is most strongly associated with
the grandiose narcissistic presentation
they tend not to communicate their
interpersonal needs they tend to
downplay the importance of love in
relationships like the toddlers in the
study they still need those things but
they've simply learned to repress their
awareness of those needs driving them
into the unconscious
these individuals consciously avoid
closeness and intimacy and since
expressing empathy is often a way of
increasing or enhancing intimacy
dismissing avoidant individuals will
tend to avoid doing so this avoidance
isn't to manipulate someone rather it's
to protect the person from experiencing
their own attachment longings remember
these individuals learned in childhood
that needing someone only results in
pain or disappointment or unbearable
frustration
and the vulnerable presentation of
narcissism is most strongly associated
with the fearful avoidant attachment
fearful avoidant attachment style is
associated with mixed messages from
caregivers in early childhood it's also
associated with trauma and with abuse
children who often exhibit something
called disorganized attachment behaviors
like approaching caregivers backwards
it's clear that there's an intense
conflict in the child between the need
for love and support and the fear that
it will be delivered in a way that hurts
or harms the child adults with fearful
avoidant attachment Styles will endorse
that they want to be close to other
people but that they're afraid in many
ways this is the most problematic of the
attachment Styles because it contains
both attachment anxiety and attachment
avoidance these individuals are worried
that other people won't like them want
them or accept them
but they're also worried that closeness
will result in pain disappointment
frustration or abuse
people with this attachment style will
often send mixed signals that reflect
their internal conflict around closeness
it might look like being really into
someone at first but then becoming
remote or aloof I think some people call
this love bombing and discarding but
they make the mistake of thinking that
this behavior is intentional and
designed to trick or manipulate people
when it often simply reflects a
disorganized attachment style and an
internal conflict between wanting love
and being terrified to actually receive
it
if you'd like to learn more about the
relationships between these attachment
Styles and pathological narcissism you
can check out my doctoral dissertation
I'll put a citation in the description
I'm sure there are other factors that
impact the availability of empathy in
pathological narcissism in MPD Dr
romani's description is likely accurate
for a small percentage of individual
individuals but I think most people with
this disorder and especially those who
tend to present in a vulnerable way
suffer from a combination of the factors
that I described in this video
okay so that's it for today as always
leave questions comments and suggestions
for future episodes below and please
also consider giving this video a like
or a subscribe if you found it helpful
and until next time take good care
[Music]
foreignhi everyone my name is Dr Mark Henson
welcome to heal NPD this is part two of
a four-part series exploring the
narcissistic personality style across
different levels of severity in part one
we explored psychotic level NPD and laid
the foundation for understanding The
Core Concepts used throughout this
series if you haven't seen that one yet
go check it out first I'll put a link in
the description today we're exploring
narcissistic personality disorder
organized at the borderline level we'll
talk about what that means and why it's
important along the way we'll explore
how identity develops what defines
personality disorders and why so many
personality disorders share overlapping
symptoms by the end you'll have a much
better understanding of what separates
narcissistic traits from full-blown NPD
and why there's real hope for Meaningful
change through treatment so let's get
started
[Music]
in part one we talked about the
difference between personality style and
personality organization personality
style looks at the core conflicts and
beliefs that sit at the very center of
someone's personality for example
narcissistic styles are focused on
self-esteem issues depressive styles on
feelings of loss and paranoid styles on
perceived threats but personality style
alone doesn't tell us whether someone is
healthy or dis functional in fact most
people have a mix of Personality Styles
although there's typically one that's
more prominent they're like different
shades on a color wheel each has its own
Hue but none is inherently better or
worse than the others if we want to talk
about health versus dysfunction then we
need to look at personality organization
using the color wheel metaphor if
personality style is like the Hue of a
color then personality organization is
like the color's saturation if indicates
how intensely the core conflicts of a
personality style affect the person's
overall mental health whether or not we
consider someone to have a personality
disorder depends on their personality
organization not their personality style
it tells us How Deeply the core
conflicts penetrate how much anxiety or
distress they produce and how
effectively the individual manages them
personality organization describes a
person's object relations object
relations is a broad construct that
includes self-image the ability to see
the self and others in flexible and
accurate ways and the relationships
between different parts of the self
including the internalized relationships
we all have inside of us from childhood
at the higher end of this spectrum we
find mature object relations where
self-image is well defined stable and
integrated and where there's an ability
to relate to others as whole people who
are separate and distinct from the self
at the lower end we find immature object
object relations where the boundaries
between self and others are blurry the
distinction between internal and
external experience is not well defined
and conflicts dominate the personality
this is the actual definition of
personality disorder it's not based on
the personality style it's based on the
individual's ability to cope it's not
the color it's the
saturation specifically personality
disorders occur exclusively in the two
lowest levels of Personality
organization which are called psychotic
and borderline last time we discussed
the psychotic level where identity is
fragile and where there's little to no
distinction between inside versus
outside the self thoughts feelings and
perceptions from Inside the Mind may
feel as though they're happening in the
external world or vice versa and this
creates psychotic experience psychotic
organization is marked by the use of
immature defenses that distort reality
and break the personality into
disconnected fragments creating confused
and disjointed states of Mind these
issues resemble the kinds of experiences
that are thought to occur in very early
childhood when the dividing line between
the self and others is still fluid and
unstable given good enough experience
most individuals develop a core Identity
or self-image this core self-image is a
crucial step toward developing
well-defined stable object relations
without it self-experience is
continually created and lost like
designs on a Sandy Beach that are simply
washed away by the tide sanity requires
a kernel of self that is stable and not
subject to Invasion or contamination by
the external World once such a kernel is
reliably established the individual's
object relations progress from psychotic
to borderline organization borderline
organization isn't the same as
borderline personality disorder or BPD
although BPD gets its name from this
level borderline organization sits quote
on the border of psychotic organization
it's an in between level where reality
testing is mostly intact but still
unstable the boundaries of self are
blurry and still somewhat variable and
parts of the self remain unintegrated
with the rest of the personality the
fundamental issue here is self-de the
Blurred boundaries between self and
others cause a constant struggle between
feelings of separateness and feelings of
symbiotic merger with neither State
feeling totally comfortable
psychologist and author Nancy McWilliams
writes the borderline person alternates
between symbiotic attachment and hostile
isolated separateness both states are
upsetting one raises the Spectre of
engulfment the other of desertion end
quote we aren't necessarily talking
about physical experiences of separation
or merger more like subjective feelings
of isolation versus belonging in
borderline States there's an internal
drive towards self-de that's
counterbalanced by intense fears of
Abandonment the person is caught between
the need to be a separate self and the
feeling that the self can't survive on
its own borderline individuals rely on
others both to provide organization and
cohesion to self- experience and also to
function as a sort of surface against
which the self can be contrasted and
defined increased self-definition brings
feelings of isolation and emptiness a
state that James Masterson called
abandonment depression
experiences of closeness dissolve into
feelings of engulfment triggering
aggressive attempts to separate while
fears of Separation lead to desperate
attempts to merge in narcissistic
personalities organized at this level
ambivalence between merger and
separation manifests as cycles of
idealization and devaluation
idealization seeks merger and
devaluation seeks separation the blurry
ambivalent self-experience that
characterizes borderline organization is
called identity diffusion according to
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Otto
kernberg quote the presence or absence
of identity diffusion differentiates
borderline from non- borderline
character pathology end quote people
with identity diffusion struggle to see
themselves and others in a clear
consistent way their descriptions of
themselves and other people can feel
contradictory or one-dimensional
individuals with identity diffusion may
also change their self-concept in real
active or even Extreme Ways redefining
who they are and what they want from
moment to moment and situation to
situation I've heard such individuals
describe themselves as chameleons or
people Pleasers able to adopt whatever
qualities seem necessary in the moment
sometimes this is conscious but often
it's not MC Williams writes quote the
experience of self is likely to be full
of inconsistency and discontinuity when
asked to describe their personalities
they may like psychotic level patients
be at a loss and when asked to describe
important people in their lives they
often give Global dismissive
descriptions end quote borderline
organization is thought to reflect a
failure to develop the ego functions
that are required to maintain a fully
individuated and integrated self-image
one that doesn't repeatedly collapse
into merged states where the self is
confused with others numerous theorists
have pointed to an early stage of
psychological development called the
Repro M subphase as the most likely
point of fixation the Repro Mal subphase
occurs around Age Two and during this
time young children want autonomy but
fear abandonment it's a time that's
marked by extreme power struggles pushes
toward Independence and pulls for
closeness successfully navigating this
period requires a lot from caregivers
patience flexibility firm boundaries
clear communication warmth and the
ability to tolerate being raged at by
someone who also needs you desperately
if successful then children emerge with
a flexible and independent sense of self
one that permits them to create
increasingly coherent and integrated
object relations as they grow into
adulthood we need both merger and
separation to build a positive stable
individuated self but the right balance
is highly individual it depends on the
child the circumstances and the stage of
development for example babies need
concrete experiences of merger because
they help establish a baseline of love
and safety that serve as a foundation
for selfhood but children in the Repro
subphase have already developed a basic
sense of self and they now require
encouragement toward autonomy plus warm
reassurance when they become overwhelmed
too much merger discourages further
development of an autonomous self
resulting in continued identity
diffusion and profound Reliance on
others too much separation creates a
false self in the child that pretends to
be independent when it's still symbiotic
this is a common configuration in NPD
where the child has endured pervasive
lapses in attuned empathic caregiving
being misunderstood mischaracterized or
overvalued for parts of the self while
undervalued for others produces
premature and traumatic experiences of
separateness that require the child to
construct a defensive island of
self-experience experience one that can
function
independently this false self becomes
very good at reflecting what the
environment seems to want and is thus
able to receive limited conditional love
and approval however the island of false
self exists in a sea of identity
diffusion parts of the self remain stuck
in a symbiotic mode of object relations
unable to cohere and individuate because
the necessary relational experiences are
simply not available the false self
might appear to function quite well
there can be Insight limited use of
mature defenses like intellectualization
and a clear albeit grandiose self-image
Otto kernberg writes quote patients with
borderline personality organization
typically present identity diffusion but
narcissistic personalities present an
important complication in this respect
the narcissistic personality usually has
an integrated self-concept but the
concept is pathological and grandiose
end quote however the false self is
prone to collapse during periods of
emotional overwhelm when the individual
is plunged back into the sea of identity
diffusion often causing severe
depression anxiety and Reliance on
borderline level defenses the right
balance between merger and separation is
hard to strike luckily things don't have
to be perfect just good enough there
will be times when the caregiver's
response doesn't match the child's need
means creating experiences of Separation
but those must be counterbalanced by an
overall sense that the self is safe
understood and loved some children need
more merger some more separation the
most important factor seems to be the
goodness of fit between what the child
needs and what caregivers provide when
there's a significant mismatch
relational trauma can occur causing
immature object relations to persist
into adulthood that being said there is
a wide range of severity within the
borderline Spectrum when most people
imagine someone with a personality
disorder they're likely picturing
someone at the mid to lower end of this
range at the higher end individuals may
have surprising levels of insight using
a mix of immature and healthier defenses
recognizing borderline organization in
high functioning individuals can
actually take months of therapy
borderline organization can be
recognized by the frequent use of
certain psycholog iCal defenses these
defenses are caused by the issues with
identity and boundaries that
characterize borderline psychologies the
defense mechanisms rating scales or dmrs
categorizes borderline level defenses as
quote immature and this reflects the
developmental arrests that contribute to
borderline
psychologies most immature defenses have
both borderline and psychotic versions
with the key difference being the extent
of reality Distortion psychotic defenses
cause significant reality ity
distortions while borderline defenses
create only minor distortions in fact
the first category of immature defense
on the dmrs is called minor image
distorting defenses these defenses
protect the individual from experiences
that threaten self-esteem such as
failure criticism or disappointment and
they include idealization devaluation
and
omnipotence idealization at the
borderline level idealization is
unrealistic but not significantly
reality distorting flaws are usually
acknowledged but sort of glossed over or
dismissed as unimportant the main
function is to counterbalance deeper
feelings of worthlessness or
vulnerability for example someone with
NPD might idealize a new boss viewing
them as the ultimate authority figure
who can do no wrong they might say
things like my boss is a genius
everything they touch turns to gold or
they're the smartest person I've ever
met this idealization may help the
individ will feel more important by
association as if their connection to
this powerful figure elevates their own
self-worth idealization is also used in
other personality disorders for instance
individuals with BPD often idealize new
romantic Partners while those with
depressive personality disorder may
idealize past relationships or qualities
of the self that now feel irretrievably
lost
devaluation this is the opposite of
idealization it's when an individ idual
attributes exaggerated negative
qualities to themselves others or
objects through devaluation they can
feel powerful over others or in control
of perceived flaws in themselves it can
also defend against disappointment or
shame over unmet emotional needs sort of
like saying I didn't need that person
anyway to avoid grief popular
representations of NPD focus on
devaluation of other people the
so-called discard phase when the
idealize ations or love bombing shift to
harsh critical treatment and the person
or relationship is suddenly viewed as
entirely bad or
worthless however devaluations of the
self also occur in NPD particularly
during the vulnerable phases of the
disorder when the individual is at
increased risk for depression anxiety
self harm or even suicide devaluation is
used in other personality disorders as
well individuals with BPD May devalue
themselves or other people when they
feel abandoned or rejected individuals
with depressive personality disorder
often devalue themselves in order to
control the pain of a traumatic loss
individuals with obsessive compulsive
personality disorder may devalue people
or situations that they see as messy
unclean or defiled and individuals with
dependent personality disorder may
devalue themselves while idealizing the
object of their dependency preserving a
feeling of powerlessness while basking
in the idealized glow of their love
object omnipotence this is when
individuals cope with emotional conflict
or stress by exaggerating their own
power abilities or influence this allows
them to feel Superior to other people as
if they possess special skills
intelligence or authority that somehow
set them apart having an inflated sense
of control or invulnerability protects
them from deeper feelings of inadequacy
or
worthlessness in NPD the grandio
self-image is typically comprised of
omnipotent and idealized attributes
someone with NPD might insist that
they're always right that their way is
the best or that others should simply
defer to their better judgment such
demands often defend against an
underlying negative self-image and deep
insecurities omnipotence is also used in
other personality disorders depressive
individuals often take too much
responsibility for failures or
disappointments and this leads to
exaggerated guilt and feelings of
worthlessness when things go wrong
individuals with BPD May unconsciously
believe that they can quote make someone
love them and antisocial individuals
often believe they're Superior and
entitled to control others without
Consequence the next category focuses on
disavowal defenses these defenses
protect the individual from upsetting or
threatening realities but they don't
usually involve psychotic distortions of
reality they include denial projection
and introjection and skitso fantasy
denial this is when an individual
refuses to acknowledge or accept
upsetting realities in order to avoid
emotional distress or protect their
self-esteem denial operates at an
unconscious level allowing the
individual to maintain a distorted or
selective view of themselves their
relationships or the world around them
at the borderline level denial is not
significantly reality distorting it's
more like not noticing something that's
upsetting or or not feeling as though
the upsetting thing were real it can
involve refusing to believe facts or
evidence minimizing the consequences of
behavior or refusing to acknowledge
difficult emotional truths individuals
with NPD often refuse to acknowledge
personal flaws or vulnerabilities that
threaten their self-image they may
dismiss valid criticisms as jealousy or
ignorance or they may deny the emotional
impact of their behavior on other people
they may also use denial to avoid
respons ibility for harm caused in
relationships denial is also common in
other personality disorders depressive
individuals may refuse to acknowledge
their own positive traits paranoid
individuals may deny the possibility
that people around them actually have
neutral or even positive intentions
dependent individuals may deny their
capacities for self-sufficiency
downplaying any signs of personal
strength or competence in order to
preserve a powerless
self-image projection and introjection
projection involves attributing
qualities of the self to other people
while introjection is the reverse
incorporating the qualities of other
people into the self projection is a way
of unconsciously expelling unwanted
aspects of
self-experience in borderline
personalities the self structure is
unable to balance internal
contradictions so boundaries of the self
are sometimes redrawn to externalize
negative qualities or experiences
basically it's not me it's you because
they represent parts of the self these
projections can't really be gotten rid
of and they must be projected repeatedly
to maintain the illusion projection
leads to interpersonal conflict creating
cycles of blame and misunderstanding the
person projecting is not able to see the
true source of the problem within
themselves in NPD projection is used to
maintain a favorable self-image by
dising threatening feelings like
jealousy and adequacy or Shame by
externalizing these emotions the
individual can avoid the distress that
comes from recognizing these traits
within themselves for example someone
with NPD May accuse other people of
being weak or inadequate rather than
confronting their own feelings of
insecurity but the door swings both ways
introjection is where an individual
unconsciously adopts the thoughts
behaviors or attitudes of another person
often someone significant in their life
such as a parent a authority figure or
partner instead of projecting unwanted
feelings outward introjection involves
internalizing qualities or attitudes of
other people making them part of the
individual's own self-concept basically
it's not you it's me introjection can
also serve protective and adaptive
functions it allows us to maintain
emotional closeness to important figures
particularly in childhood by
internalizing their values beliefs or
behaviors however it can also lead to
difficulties if the internalizations are
negative or harmful for example if a
child injects the harsh criticism of an
abusive parent then they may develop
punitive self-critical attitudes
sometimes these are so strong that they
can cause suicidal ideation or self harm
in NPD introjects form the basis for
positive self-object experiences
so-called narcissistic Supply this is
when compliments or admiration are
internalized as parts of the self
however because the injects are parts of
another person that have been sort of
claimed for the self the individual
can't sustain the self-esteem boost and
constantly needs fresh admiration to
maintain the illusion projection and
injection are also widely used defense
mechanisms across different personality
disorders schizoid fantasy schizoid
fantasy involves Retreat into an inner
world of fantasy to escape from
overwhelming stressful or threatening
real life situations
this defense allows the person to avoid
dealing with external pressures
conflicts or Relationships by immersing
themselves in imagined scenarios where
they feel safe powerful or in control
while adaptive in childhood persistent
use of schizoid fantasy in adulthood
often signals significant difficulties
with emotional regulation and
interpersonal relationships for
individuals with NPD particularly those
with interpersonal avoidance or a
secondary schizoid personality Style
schizoid fantasy can be a primary coping
strategy they may spend hours absorbed
in grandiose fantasies where they see
themselves as powerful or attractive for
some individuals fantasies may also
contain themes of Revenge and these are
used to cope with feelings of inadequacy
Envy or
rejection the final category is Major
image distorting defenses here we find
two defenses that really Define the
borderline level they're called
splitting and projective
identification splitting splitting is
the key to understanding many of the
instabilities that we associate with
personality disorders it causes
fundamental divisions in the individual
self-image and perceptions of other
people splitting is often mistakenly
called black and white thinking but it's
more than a cognitive issue it's an
identity disturbance in borderline
organization the self is unstable and
prone to overwhelming emotions and
polarized perceptions upsetting
experiences aren't just uncomfort
comfortable they often feel traumatic as
BPD expert Marsha linahan describes it
quote they're like people with third
degree burns over 90% of their bodies
lacking emotional skin they feel Agony
at the slightest touch end quote
splitting helps contain the devastation
and Pain by separating parts of the self
into isolated containers sort of like
siloed parts of the self internal
communication between these parts is
often limited such division or splits in
the personality protect the person from
being overwhelmed by trauma Bound images
of the self and other people splitting
is remarkably effective but it's also
costly it's a defense that we all use in
early childhood it allows us to preserve
self-esteem and to protect important
attachment Relationships by keeping the
bad separate from the good we avoid the
anxiety or confusion that comes from
recognizing both positive and negative
traits in ourselves or other people
before we have the ego function to
balance these
contradictions over time most people
integrate positive and negative feelings
into a cohesive whole but in borderline
organizations this ability is not
reliably developed often due to Chronic
relational trauma or adverse childhood
experiences the person gets stuck with
polarized All or Nothing views of the
self and other people that limit insight
and cause cause significant
interpersonal disruptions relationships
become a cycle of repeating traumas as
the individual shifts between idealizing
and devaluing internal States one moment
they may see themselves in other people
as good but a small trigger like a tone
of voice or a phrase can cause them to
shift to the negative side of the split
from this perspective the self is
experienced as weak or unworthy and
other people as hurtful or dangerous in
that moment believe these perceptions
completely leading to extreme Behavior
like yelling or sobbing hurling
accusations or devaluing the entire
relationship later they may be unable to
connect to what they thought or did in
this state of mind and this is one
reason that apologies from individuals
with borderline organization can feel
shallow why they can't seem to sustain
meaningful change and why they can seem
to be completely in love with someone
one minute and absolutely hate their
guts the next it's important to
understand that none of this is
performative it isn't a form of
deception the individual who is
splitting sincerely believes their All
or Nothing worldview in that moment and
they typically have little to know
insight about the extreme dichotomies in
their thinking and behavior in NPD
splitting May manifest as swings between
a grandiose and devalued self-experience
when praised or admired the person may
feel grandiose and Superior but when
criticized or faced with failure they
may feel humiliated and worthless
leading to sudden devaluation of
themselves or other people this devalued
self-image is often filled with feelings
of Rage shame and unmet emotional needs
OT kernberg writes quote at the very
bottom lies the image of a hungry
enraged empty self full of impotent
anger at being frustrated and fearful of
a world which seems as hateful and
revengeful as the patient himself end
quote splitting is also a Hallmark
defense in BPD where it drives much of
the emotional disregulation and dramatic
behavior that characterize the disorder
projective identification this defense
exemplifies the Blurred boundaries of
borderline organization it involves
unconsciously projecting unwanted
feelings thoughts or parts of the self
onto someone else and then interacting
with that person in such a way that it
pressures them to feel those projections
as though they were their own emotions
for example someone with NPD might
project feelings of worthlessness or
inadequacy onto their partner and then
behave in a way that causes their
partner to actually feel worthless in
this way the partner identifies with the
projections they take them on as their
own
feelings sometimes the popular concept
of narcissistic abuse is used to
describe the cumulative effects of
projective identification in a
relationship where a significant other
or family member has been heavily
criticized or provoked to the point
where they begin to doubt their own
reality or
self-worth however projective
identification is not specific to NPD
it's also encountered in other
personality disorders although it can
seem confusing there's nothing magical
going on here it's entirely possible to
perceive someone through the lens of
your own unconscious conflicts and to
treat that person in a way that causes
them to feel whatever it is that you are
trying not to acknowledge in yourself in
early childhood projective identific
ation can be beneficial because it
conveys emotional experiences to
caregivers that the child is too young
to articulate the infant's cries create
a feeling of emergency or distress in
the caregiver that is similar to the
child's internal State projective
identification serves a similar function
in therapy where challenging patients
often provoke the therapist to feel the
same feelings of powerlessness
ineffectiveness or anger that the
patient is trying to manage in
themselves recognizing these
provocations as a regressed form of
emotional communication has helped
countless therapists better understand
the inner lives of their borderline
patients all of these defenses mildly
distort reality blur the boundaries
between the self and others or disrupt
the continuity of self-experience and
this is what defines them as borderline
level defenses they reflect identity
defusion lack of clear boundaries and
emotional and psychological confusion
most of them are are also
interpersonally provocative creating
dysfunction in relationships many of
them involve mistaking something that's
inside the self for something that
belongs to other people or failing to
recognize the complexity of human
emotions and motivations instead
collapsing situations into
oversimplified polarized perceptions
that cause others to feel blamed or
misunderstood these unconscious
distortions can lead to maladaptive or
even harmful behaviors that seem
reasonable to the person in the moment
they push perceptions of the self and of
other people into extreme categories
those in relationships with such
individuals might reasonably conclude
that the person is actually a diabolical
liar and manipulator when the individual
is wildly derogatory and devaluing one
moment and then shifts to viewing
themselves as the aggrieved party in the
next moment it has every appearance of
intentional and cynical manipulation
strategies like
gaslighting I'm not attempting to excuse
manipulative or abusive behavior in most
circumstances individuals with
borderline organizations have sufficient
contact with reality to be accountable
for their actions but borderline issues
do involve significantly skewed
perceptions of the self and others and
Reliance on unconscious defense
mechanisms that blur boundaries and that
prevent the individual from having full
awareness of what they're doing and why
they're doing it it's a level of object
relations where reality floats in and
out of clear focus when emotionally
overwhelmed the individual May regress
back to a level of object relations that
is basically psychotic and when things
are going well they may appear to
function at or near the neurotic level
where the self-concept is integrated and
stable it's a confusing somewhat
disturbing range of psychological
functioning so what does someone with
NPD look like at the borderline level
well remember in borderline
organizations the person 's core
conflicts and preoccupations dominate
the personality in NPD this means that
all or most of the person's perceptions
thoughts feelings and behaviors will in
some way be about self-image and
self-esteem borderline organization is
also marked by internal instability so
the individual's self-image may be
widely variable moving unpredictably
from the heights of grandiosity to the
depths of Shame and self-loathing the
period or frequency of these transitions
varies from person to person but all
individuals with NPD organized at this
level experience extremes in self-image
that are distorted yes but that also
retain some connection to reality a
smart person may consider themselves to
be a genius an attractive person may
think of themselves as runway model
material social interactions are also
distorted but Loosely reality based
someone who gave the person a compliment
might be described as obsessed with them
them Etc negative self-perceptions are
similarly distorted whatever the
veilance of self-perception be it
positive or negative it will also be
unstable and based on splitting the
person will alternate between grandiose
and devalued splits in the self
grandiosity is marked by idealization
omnipotence and denial of emotional
needs the person may experience soaring
self-esteem expansive attitudes and
behaviors feelings of superiority or
omnibenevolence
or they may experience disdain for
people onto whom they've projected
feelings of worthlessness or inadequacy
in grandio States the person may have no
memory or subjective awareness of ever
having felt differently which can lead
to outrageously insensitive or cruel
Behavior the subjective dissociation
from any and all vulnerability or
emotional need make it difficult for
individuals in grandio states to
empathize with other people or to offer
a sincere apology for their actions it
really is hard to overstate the Euphoria
of grandiosity in Borderland level NPD
however the inherent instability of
grandio self-perception can also cause
anxiety and pressure to quote perform
such pressure is itself destabilizing
and typically hastens the inevitable
collapse into vulnerable self- States
the inflated self-esteem of narcissistic
grandiosity relies on the defenses we've
discussed to continually deny project or
split off insecurities and
vulnerabilities but eventually such
feelings become overwhelming leading to
self-esteem collapse now on the other
side of the grandiose vulnerable split
the person with NPD is exposed to
devalued or empty self-experience that
is dominated by attachment anxiety rage
dependency shame and overt mistrust of
other people feelings of inadequacy
insecurity and social anxiety become
prominent they may also experience
illness anxiety paranoia panic attacks
and depression the collapse into
vulnerability is made worse by the
pressure that the individual feels to
get back to the grandiose
self-experience they may feel as though
they've somehow lost their quote real
self even though what they're
experiencing in collapse is simply the
other side of the coin vulnerability in
NPD can involve hopeless empty agonizing
states of Mind those around the
individual often notice the stark
contrast between vulnerable and
grandiose States but the individual
themselves may not notice they may deny
or minimize the differences failing to
recognize the obvious cycles of
self-esteem inflation and self-esteem
collapse those around them may also try
to help with reassurances and emotional
support but they're often met with help
rejecting behaviors that actualize the
individual's feelings of hopelessness
the only real solution is treatment the
therapist and patient together must
weather these storms of grandiosity and
collapse during periods of grandiosity
the therapist must find ways to hold
onto the reality of the patient
vulnerability and during periods of
vulnerability the therapist must find
ways to hold the patient's hope the goal
is integration to forge a more stable
realistic coherent self-image that is
well- defined and better able to
tolerate and contain the core conflicts
that Define the narcissistic personality
Style
according to MC Williams quote the aim
of therapy for people with borderline
psychologies is the development of an
integrated stable complex and positively
valued sense of self end quote such work
can take a long time and there may be
periods especially at the beginning when
it seems like things are actually
getting worse as the individual's
defenses begin to break down they're
often exposed to underlying negative
devalued images of the self and other
people
there are typically numerous unconscious
attempts to sabotage disrupt or
terminate treatment because it doesn't
feel to the person that anyone
themselves included could survive the
full weight of unprocessed emotion that
lies buried in their vulnerable
self-experience the only way to treat
the disjointed internal experience of
borderline organization is to go through
it it's a collaborative Endeavor between
therapist and patient such a path can
seem hopeless ly Tangled but when we
reflect on the relational experiences
that produce mature object relations we
see a similar tangle it's just spread
out over the years of Early Childhood
feelings of hopelessness Terror rage
dependency distorted self-perceptions
confusion emotional disregulation and
immature coping are frequent features of
Early Childhood experience in borderline
organizations the environment wasn't a
good enough fit to help the child with
these feelings and the individual grew
into an adult who continues to struggle
with them in treating borderline issues
both the therapist and patient are
exposed to powerful and intense feelings
contradictory perceptions of the self
and other people and limit testing that
would absolutely destroy normal
relationships these issues require the
boundaries and safety of a therapeutic
space and the training and insight of a
therapist who can recognize the pushes
and pulls for what they really represent
MC Williams writes quote along with
integration goes the evolution of a
capacity to love other people fully
despite their flaws and contradictions
and the ability to tolerate and regulate
a wide range of emotions and quote the
ego functions that help us to integrate
and individuate are forged through
relational experiences we internalize
these capacities from those around us a
phenomenon that Hines kohut called
transmuting internal ization in time it
is possible to bring the siloed parts of
the self together and to weave an
integrated tapestry of
self-experience individuals with
borderline organization can learn to see
and love themselves and other people in
three dimensions these capacities are
not forever Out Of Reach they've simply
not yet been
developed okay so that's it for today
the next video in this series will
explore the narcissistic style organized
at the neurotic level where self-image
and boundaries are much more stable and
well- defined allowing the individual to
experience new feelings that weren't
possible before such as grief and Paving
the way for the use of more
sophisticated defenses that are also
less disruptive to
relationships as always if you found
this video helpful feel free to give it
a like or to share with your friends and
until next time take good care
[Music]according to the American Psychiatric
association mental illness refers
collectively to all diagnosable mental
disorders and that includes personality
disorders like NPD so by definition NPD
is a mental illness because it is a
diagnosable mental disorder