hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel
we're talking about a topic that I am
very excited about and this is the topic
of how to build self-trust I believe
that self-trust is at the absolute core
of any sort of healing work until we
believe that we can trust ourselves to
do what we said we would do and to show
up for ourselves in a way that is going
to make our lives healthier happier more
expansive it's going to be really
difficult to get any hard self work done
and so I believe that fostering
self-trust needs to be a foundational
piece of the attachment healing process
but it can also be a kind of
intimidating thing to think about for
those of us who have spent a lot of our
lives self-abandoning so if you don't
know what I mean when I use that term I
did film a video all about the term
self-abandonment I will link it in the
description of this video and you can go
there to check out whether that term
applies to you but most of us who did
not grow up securely attached have
somewhat of a pattern of self-abanding
in different circumstances and therefore
not being able to trust ourselves to
follow through on exactly what it is
that we want to do with our lives in
this video we're going to talk about how
to start working towards that
follow-through and how to build yourself
into a person over time who you can look
up to have respect for and Trust to do
what you said you would do for yourself
and for whatever reason it felt the most
intuitive to me to present five kind of
tools or strategies you could use First
in their inverse form so we're going to
talk about what makes it difficult to
trust ourselves and then we're going to
talk about how to do the opposite of
that thing so rather than over
explaining what I mean by that we'll
just dive into number one so number one
it is very hard to trust yourself if you
are continuously making promises to
yourself that you don't keep so if
you're the kind of person who is
constantly making plans for the future
that you get really excited about and
then do not follow through on or who is
always telling yourself tomorrow I'm
going to start operating differently
what you are doing is continuously
breaking the trust of your inner child
right there's a very young very innocent
part of you that gets really excited
every time you make these big plans for
your future and that part of yourself is
getting continuously let down every time
you get emotionally invested in a plan
and then don't follow through on it now
there are Myriad reasons why someone
might do this sometimes what we're doing
when we make grandiose plans and then
fail to follow through on them is that
we're actually using the idea of that
fantasy future as a means of
self-regulating through a difficult
moment so I think that a lot of the time
when people have this sense of I just
lack follow-through what's actually
going on is that they're using visions
of a fantasy future which they never
ever truly intended to work towards as a
means of calming themselves down or
avoiding some sort of pain in the moment
and that can get really confusing if
you're always telling yourself I'm going
to work towards this goal or that goal
and then you're never actually taking
action on it and in this case it can be
helpful to just recognize those who are
never necessarily plans to begin with
just like a child whose trust you have
continuously broken you need to have an
action plan for winning your own
self-trust back and in order to win
yourself trust back you have to start
treating the relationship you have with
your inner child the way you would treat
a relationship with someone else unless
you're also very flaky with other people
but you get what I'm saying sometimes
when we make a plan with someone else we
want to do that plan in the moment and
then when it gets closer to we don't
want to do it anymore but we still show
up because we said we would and we want
other people to think of us as
trustworthy and as people who do what
they said they would do because then
those people want to form closer
relationships with us and the same is
true of ourselves sometimes we make a
plan and as we get closer to that plan
we don't want to do it anymore but if we
care about the relationship we have with
ourselves we need to be following
through on the plans that we made with
the young innocent excitable part of
ourselves in order to prove to them I am
a trustworthy person I do what I say
that I will do
and the more that you do this the more
you refuse to bail on the plans that you
made for yourself the more you're going
to start developing discernment about
which plans you want to commit to in the
first place
but to get started on this what you want
to do is start making very small goals
that you follow through on solely for
the sake of following through on them
not because there's a particular outcome
you want that is really big not because
you want to hold yourself accountable to
somebody else just pick one small thing
that you can commit to doing for the
next 30 days in a row that will make
your life genuinely better in some small
way every day and then do that thing
solely because you said you would do it
even if there's a day where it does not
make sense to do it or it's annoying to
do it do it that day solely because you
said you would do it and I really do
recommend making this a small thing
don't make it something you hate don't
make it something you know in advance
you're going to feel extreme resistance
to make it something very manageable
maybe it's every morning for 30 mornings
I'm going to take 10 minutes where I sit
out on my porch and drink my coffee with
my phone turned off maybe it's every day
for 30 days I'm going to eat something
that I cooked or baked myself
maybe it's every day for 30 days I'm
going to meditate or exercise for one
minute write these tiny micro goals that
we know will make our day a little bit
more positive but we're also sure we can
hold ourselves accountable to
maintaining
start that process of building
self-trust if every day in at least one
instance you're giving yourself the
feeling of I'm a person who is
consistent and trustworthy to myself
you're beginning to build a positive
self relationship so this is the process
of just beginning to strengthen and
train the muscle of self-accountability
and self-reliability and just like when
it comes to training in any other
capacity we want to start small but be
consistent if we want our progress to be
long lasting so step one to combat the
problem of not trusting yourself because
you continuously do not do what you say
you will do you want to pick something
that you are sure you can count on
yourself to follow through on for 30
days and do that thing only because you
said you would so no getting out if you
hate it halfway through if you find a
better idea halfway through if your
schedule changes and you get annoyed it
doesn't matter because the purpose of
this is not to make make you happy it is
to make you trust yourself do it only
because you said you would second thing
that gets in the way of self trust it is
very difficult to trust yourself if you
don't understand why you are doing the
things that you are doing so this step
is all about being present and
compassionate with yourself as you
unpack things like trauma responses or
patterns of self-abandoning behavior
that you previously have not understood
so for most of us we go into most
situations thinking I'm going to be well
boundaried I'm going to be clear about
what I want to need I'm not going to
jump ship on myself in this situation
and then most of us especially most of
us who end up watching videos like this
and who may have a history of trauma end
up in a situation where we find
ourselves Frozen maybe fawning over
another person feeling totally
disconnected from ourselves and being
willing to do almost anything to get out
of the situation without getting into
some sort of conflict and if we are not
aware of the fact that responses like
this might come online for us it's going
to be very difficult for us to make
plans that we can say we are certain we
will follow through on even if we make
those plans with the best of intentions
we have to account for the situations in
which we will or are highly likely to
get emotionally hijacked buyer triggers
or buyer attachment systems and we have
to develop plans for what we will do in
those situations so if my body is frozen
if I'm feeling terrified or if I'm
feeling overcome with anger and
adrenaline what will I do in that
situation knowing that I will not be
thinking clearly and might just need to
completely disconnect from it in order
to have a response that I'm proud of
what will I do when things go wrong when
I get triggered when I am not feeling
like I am myself when I'm tired or
overwhelmed or grumpy being willing to
look at how we normally behave in those
States and make contingency plans for
when those States crop up is going to go
a really long way in the process of
building self-trust there is a long
period of my life where every day at the
end of the day I would Journal out just
some Reflections on the day like what
did I do really well what am I proud of
myself for today and what could I have
done better
and something I noticed myself
consistently journaling about was that
there were many days where what I could
have done better was just recognize like
four hours earlier than I had that I was
not going to be my normal level of
productive that day or my normal level
of friendly that day or my normal level
of calm and able to work through issues
interpersonally that day because I was
feeling some sort of Trigger or some
sort of upset or some level of
dissociation and had I realized that
earlier in the day and just accepted it
and instead of trying to force myself to
have the day that I had planned which I
was not emotionally regulated enough to
go through with authentically the day
would have gone a lot better if I'd just
recognize sooner that this is a day
where I need to now have a different
plan because my system is not reacting
the way that I thought it would be
reacting when I made this plan and if
you have a trauma history this I believe
is one of the kindest and most
compassionate things you can learn to do
for yourself to recognize in the moment
when you're dysregulated when you're
dissociating when something is feeling
off or wrong in your system and allowing
yourself the grace of adjusting your
expectations for what you are going to
do that day or how you're going to
interact with yourself or other people
until you've found a way to resolve or
move past that feeling because when we
are in those triggered States this is
where we are most prone to entering
self-abandonment territory it's really
hard to behave the way that we hope we
would behave when our fight flight
freeze or fond defenses are coming up to
the surface and it can be really helpful
in the process of building self-trust to
just notice when those responses are
online what's the best possible way we
could move through those situations
without making things worse for
ourselves by completely self-abandoning
by saying okay I'm just going to agree
to whatever this person is saying to me
without checking in with myself on
whether or not I truly agree to it
because right now I feel fro Chosen and
terrified without starting an argument
and going into Attack Mode the moment I
feel disrespected what can I do to stay
aware of which types of situations tend
to trigger me how can I notice when I am
in a triggered State and then what can I
do to get myself out of the situation
before I self-abandon in some way and
then come back to it when I am more
regulated this process takes a long time
to master it's not simple but if you can
get a decent handle on it it goes an
incredibly long way towards building
self-trust and self-accountability
because you now know that if you find
yourself in a significantly different
emotional state than the one that you
were in when you made the plan of what
you wanted to do with a given day or a
given situation you know that you will
be able to navigate through it without
self-abanding because you have an
inherent trust in who you are when
you're regulated and you also can slowly
begin to trust yourself to notice when
you are not regulated and leave the
difficult problem solving up to the
version of you who later on will be
feeling more calm and clear-headed and
in touch with themselves issue number
three that tends to interfere with a lot
of our abilities to trust ourselves it's
very difficult to trust yourself if you
do not feel as though you are handling
your relationships with other people
with integrity and honesty the reason
why it's really difficult to trust
yourself if you are constantly being
flaky or dishonest towards other people
is because that is likely to result in a
lot of feelings of guilt and
self-judgment and when we are operating
from a place of guilt and self-judgment
it's hard to make decisions that factor
in our authentic wants and needs because
we are trying to even a score instead of
actually think about what is important
to us so what a lot of us who have
trauma responses or insecure attachment
systems are prone to doing is
over-promising saying yes to a lot of
things that we don't necessarily
actually want to say yes to and then
bailing on them last minute or ghosting
our way out of them and this functions
to keep us feeling good in the moment
that we are standing in front of another
person saying yes I will do that yes I
will help with that we get that hit of
ooh they like me right and then if we
are not having to turn them down to
their face if we just send them a text
message later saying I'm not going or if
we just never let them know that we're
not going we never actually have to feel
the full embodied consequence of our
actions and so what I suggest to
counteract this is for a period of at
least 30 days if not indefinitely start
keeping every single commitment you
agree to Bar some sort of extreme
emergency
and the reason I recommend doing this is
because you will start to develop a
sense for what it is that you really do
not want to do when we are just thinking
in the moment of whether or not we want
someone to like us for saying yes or no
or whether or not we want to avoid
conflict by saying yes or no what we are
not thinking about in that moment is
what do I like what do I want which
things make me feel excited and
enthusiastic and like I want to run
towards them and which things do I feel
like I don't so much want to do like it
would be restrictive or uncomfortable
for me to say yes to that thing if we
are not really checking in with
ourselves because we know without a
shadow of a doubt that if we say yes we
are going to actually do that thing it's
really easy to just over promise and
under deliver chronically and when we
are chronically over promising and under
delivering again guilt and anxiety
starts to rule our decision-making
process and then when once again that is
prime self-abandonment territory however
the more we start showing up and doing
what we say we will do and showing
genuine care and respect towards the
people in our lives the more we're going
to start to develop a sense of respect
for ourselves and the more we respect
ourselves the easier it is to set
boundaries and say no to situations that
we truly don't want to engage with
because we feel as though we deserve to
we feel as though we are fair and
rational people and so the limits and
boundaries we set are by extension also
fair and rational so there is a point in
my own attachment healing process where
I became very aware that I had a
tendency to ghost my way out of
relationships that I didn't want to be
in I didn't like to raise issues it felt
too vulnerable so if an issue came up in
a relationship I would generally just
stop speaking to the person slowly over
time and after my last long-term
relationship ended I went you know what
I don't want to give myself the option
to do that anymore
so I'm going to make a rule for myself
that now I am only allowed to date
people who are within my social network
the reason why I'm only going to allow
myself to date people inside of my own
social network is because my friends and
the people I'm close to all know that
I'm working on being a more accountable
person who does what they say that they
will do for other people so if I start
seeing someone who they introduce me to
they are going to know and they are
going to be able to call me out on if I
am not doing that and this ended up
being a pretty good Fail-Safe for two
reasons one it helped me externally
accountable to not being on my own BS
and two once I started really
internalizing the fact that if I go out
on a date with someone and I don't like
them I'm going to have to tell them to
their face that I feel like we're not
compatible and we should go our separate
ways a thought that terrifies me I'm now
going to be way more choosy about who I
say yes to a date to I'm not just gonna
go out on a date because I'm bored one
night if I know that at the end of the
date if I'm not feeling it I'm going to
have to tell them that so my yeses and
no's and my critical thinking about
which decisions I wanted to make
interpersonally had to be way more
online way earlier on in the process I
couldn't just self-abandon temporarily
for a hit and then not suffer any of the
consequences and this is what happens
when we start doing what we said we
would do there's another situation I
think back to quite a bit where I got
invited to a weekend at someone's
Cottage and at the time that I was
invited I really wanted to go and then I
learned some additional details about
that weekend that made me go oh that's
actually really inconvenient for me I
kind of wish I hadn't said yes to this
now that I know how far away it is how
much of a time and financial commitment
it's going to be but because I was
following through on things I went
anyways and I learned through that
process I need to be asking more details
up front before I commit to a lot of
things so all of this helps us really
hone in on the moments in which we
haven't historically thought to ask more
questions or to get more curious about a
given experience early on and to make
sure that when we are saying yes or no
we know what we are saying yes or no to
and knowing that we are the kind of
people who will be deliberate and
intentional about doing our homework
before we commit to any plan goes a
really long way in building self-trust
we all naturally place our trust in
people who we believe do their homework
and ask the right questions from the
get-go before making a decision and the
same is absolutely true of ourselves so
by forcing ourselves to experience the
consequences of the times when we don't
do our research and when we are too
quick to commit to something we are
going to train ourselves to do all of
that much earlier on than we normally
would and that can go a long way
enforcing ourselves in to becoming
someone we trust now thing number four
that tends to keep a lot of us away from
that feeling of self-trust and this is
in my opinion maybe the single biggest
one you will not trust yourself if you
cannot trust yourself to say no when you
mean no it is almost impossible to trust
ourselves if we do not know where our
limits and boundaries are and we do not
trust ourselves to enforce them a lot of
what we've been talking about up until
this point directly connects to this
right the more we do what we said we
would do the more we force ourselves to
experience the consequences of our own
choices the more we are going to start
learning where our limits lie what we do
and don't want which boundaries we want
to have in place with other people and
in order to start trusting ourselves we
have to be willing to enforce those
boundaries in the moment that they come
up this is a really difficult step but a
really important one if you can learn to
identify and respect your own boundaries
your own nose you are going to be able
to start taking infinitely more
emotional risks because you're not going
to have to worry about other people's
behavior you're not going to have to get
fixated on how other people are treating
you if you know how you are fine with
and not fine with being treated everyone
else can behave however they would like
and you can remain calm and centered
because you know where your own limits
are so there's one point in my own
healing process where I was having a
conversation with someone I was close to
and both of us had a history of being
incredibly flaky and I was like okay I'm
going to try out this vulnerability
thing and I told them I really want to
be close to you and I want us to stay in
each other's lives in a very consistent
way but I have trouble trusting you
because you often don't do what you say
you will do
and they looked at me and they said I
have the exact same problem with you and
so we made an agreement in that moment
that anytime either of us had an issue
in the relationship we're feeling
uncomfortable had a moment where what we
would normally do is disconnect and take
space without communicating it to the
other person we would instead show up
and in a compassionate way let the other
person know what was going on for us and
see if we could work together to find a
solution for that thing and choosing to
adhere to that promise absolutely
revolutionized my experience of what a
close relationship could be because I
started learning that almost every time
I was inclined to pull away what was
happening for me when I stopped and
stayed present with it was that
something in the relationship felt like
a no
something felt like a boundary being
crossed that I didn't want crossed and
so I had to by virtue of the agreement
that I was dedicated to sticking to show
up and say what that thing was and in
that process I learned my own boundaries
and the more I figured out where those
no's where those boundaries lay for
myself the more I began to make those
boundaries clear with other people way
earlier on in my relationships just so
you know this is how I prefer to operate
this is a boundary for me in this area
are you cool with that and the act of
being aware of as well as learning how
to compassionately phrase my own
boundaries gave me back so much
self-trust it was incredible
and the unexpected consequence of this
that really surprised me in a positive
way was how much other people began
trusting me when I started consistently
asserting my boundaries I think that
most people with again any sort of
enmeshment trauma any sort of attachment
wounding have this fear that if I set my
boundaries and I'm clear about them I
will be abandoned and while this may be
true if we are choosing to engage with
other people who really fear and feel
threatened by boundaries it is the
absolute opposite of true once we start
having secure relationships in the world
of secure attachment boundaries are the
thing that make relationships work
better not worse they are the healthy
limits that allow us to show up without
fear and trepidation inside of
relationships it's kind of like having a
fence around a playground you're going
to feel a lot more comfortable letting
your child play freely in an area where
you know there are clear boundaries
around what is safe and what is not not
and I think a beautiful kind of example
from the other side of this is that
after I'd been practicing this for some
time I was having a situation with a
close friend where our energy was kind
of weird for a couple days there was
some sort of resentment I could feel
Building inside of me and when I finally
became kind of consciously aware of what
the problem was for me and I sat down
with that person to have a talk with
them about it I apologized and went look
I recognized my Energy's been a little
bit weird for the past couple days and
you've probably been feeling that and
they went oh that's okay I trust you to
bring things up and I know that when
something kind of weird is going on
within a couple of days you're
definitely going to let me know what it
is and we're gonna work through it and I
think that to that person that seemed
very simple to me that was a complete
180 from the way that I was used to
people experiencing me but this is
exactly what happens when we become
aware of our own boundaries and
limitations and yeses and no's and we
live in integrity and in alignment with
them other people begin to trust us and
that means that inside of all of our
relationships everyone can breathe a lot
easier when things feel weird or off
because we have a track record of
addressing things within a reasonable
time frame when things feel weirder off
and using boundaries and communication
skills to let the people we care about
know how we can go forward in a better
way and the fifth and final thing I want
to talk about today that tends to make
it really difficult for us to trust
ourselves is that it is very difficult
to consistently trust yourself if you
are frequently zoned out or dissociated
from your present moment experience and
are therefore ignorant to what you are
feeling in most moments now again do not
beat yourself up if this is the case for
you this is an Adaptive response for
many of us who grew up in situations
where not being particularly present
with our emotional experience was what
we needed to do to get by however if
what we want to work on as adults is
building a sense of deep self-trust we
have to be able to trust ourselves to
show up and pay attention to what is and
isn't working for us in a given moment
if you are hiring a security guard to
make sure that your building is safe you
would not hire someone who you knew was
going to be asleep on the job you would
not trust that person to recognize and
respond to threats appropriately and the
same is true if you are trying to keep
your yourself psychologically safe it's
really hard to trust yourself if you are
frequently dissociated into fantasy or
zoned out from your inner experience or
actively denying and belittling your own
emotional experience if any of those
things are consistently the case it's
going to be very difficult for you to
appropriately recognize and respond to
threats and if you cannot be trusted to
appropriately recognize and respond to
emotional threats it's going to be
really difficult to trust yourself as
well as to make wise decisions for
yourself making wise internally
congruent decisions means being able to
align the way that you feel and what you
want with the actions that you take in
the world to do this we have to be
willing to stay as present as possible
with ourselves in as many moments as
possible and this is not an easy task
this is a lifelong process that for many
of us we will have to be refining and
working on over the entire course of our
lives however the more present we are
with ourselves in every moment the more
we are able to take congruent actions
that allow us to actually align the
person we are inside with the way that
we are showing up in our outside lives
and the more we Master this skill and
the more comfortable we get with using
our present moment awareness to be
Discerning about our choices and make
wise holistic decisions for ourselves
the more we are going to start naturally
and instinctively trusting ourselves
what kind of a night Watchman do you
want to hire the one who knows which
threats to watch out for who is present
and alert to everything that is going on
around them and who knows which steps
are appropriate to take when in the name
of protection and the same is true of
protecting yourself alright that is all
I have to say for today on this topic of
Building self trust however as always
there is much more that could and will
be said again in the future in the
meantime let me know which thoughts
feelings questions are popping up for
you as you watch this video and feel
free to leave them in the comments I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and your
inner children and I will see you back
here again really soon
foreign
[Music]