hey guys Heidi PRI here I am feeling
very happy to be back it's been a little
while since I've been filming
consistently and honestly it will
probably be a little while until I am
once again filming consistently because
I am finishing a dissertation right now
for my master's program in attachment
Theory and it turns out that takes up a
lot of time and energy that I would love
to be pouring into YouTube but that is
going to have to wait until later this
summer but in the meantime I felt called
today to do a video like I have just
been turning something over in my mind
that I imagine it feels very important
for me to share like I would like to
have a conversation with you all about
it so here we are today to talk about
self love now my entire life I had a
very flawed relationship with self-love
in that I thought you could feel love
for yourself sometimes and not other
times like I thought I love myself when
I am living up to my own expectations or
when I am living in alignment with my
morals and values and maybe succeeding
in certain areas that feel important to
me and when I am not doing any of those
things I don't love myself I felt like
okay I have to earn my own love you know
and I thought that was kind of a point
of Pride like I was like oh I'm not one
of those weak people who loves
themselves when they're depressed or
whatever and at this point in my life
what I have realized is that there is
not a pick or choose with this you
either love yourself or you
conditionally accept yourself but you
cannot have it both ways there is
literally no such thing as sometimes
love because what love is is a space
that is big enough for absolutely
everything to exist within both your
successes and your failures both the
things that you are prideful about and
the things that you feel incredibly
shameful about if your love is not big
enough to Encompass all of that stuff
for other people or for yourself what
you're practicing is probably not love
it's conditional except
okay so to make this clearer I want you
to imagine that you have a baby that has
just been brought into this world it is
your baby you're going to raise it it's
your responsibility to instill morals
and values and a way of understanding
the world into this baby so far as it's
within your power to do so and you get a
choice you get to teach the baby one of
two things thing one is baby I will
accept you when you are performing in a
way that I like when you are acing your
tests at school when you are the fastest
runner on the team when you look and
speak perfectly then it's time for you
to feel okay about yourself but the rest
of the time when you are failing when
you take your first step and then fall
over when you try to speak your first
word and it comes out funny I will
reject you I will shame you I will tell
you that there's something wrong with
you and you will grow up with the belief
that you are good enough only when you
are doing well and the rest of the time
you are not worthy of love
okay that's one belief you could instill
in your baby the other belief you could
instill in your child is I love you all
of the time I love you when you are the
fastest runner on the team and I love
you when you are the slowest runner on
the team I love you when you are getting
straight A's I love you when you are
flunking out of school I love you when
you are taking your first step I love
you when you are on the ground crying
because you have fallen over that is
love right that's what love is it is
being there to witness and hold space
for the entire spectrum of who someone
is and what happens to them throughout
their lives and I think that for most of
us it's a no-brainer that that's the one
we want for our children right we want
our children to feel loved and valued
and accepted at every single step of the
process even if they're failing and if
anything most of us would intuitively
understand that children need the most
support and the most love and they need
to be seen and validated and cared for
the most when they are not doing well
right that's when they need the most
support from us as their parents but we
don't always apply that same principle
to ourselves right because the choice
that you are making with that child is
the exact same choice you need to make
about yourself okay if you accept and
love yourself only when you are doing
well you do not love yourself you
conditionally accept yourself self-love
is either big enough to hold the entire
spectrum of who you are or it is not
love it's something else and each of us
have to make a choice about whether we
are going to love ourselves or whether
we are going to conditionally accept
ourselves some of us my past self-
included have this story that if we love
ourselves all of the time then we will
never have motivation to get better then
we will never catch ourselves if we're
doing something wrong then we will
become unmotivated and unintelligent
slobs of human beings who have no real
place in the world and I would argue
that conditional self-acceptance is kind
of like surv suring on a diet of cocaine
where a self-love is like surviving on a
diet of nourishing and Rich vegetables
and foods that actually give you what
you need to thrive right one is very
motivating for giving you a quick hit
that will get you a quick but fleeting
result and the other sustains you on the
long-term journey of becoming an
emotionally stable and successful human
being in all areas of your life not just
certain ones so the first thing I want
to be clear about is that we cannot have
both you cannot be someone who hates
yourself and criticizes yourself and
thinks you're a piece of when
things are not going well for you and
who also loves yourself you have to pick
are you going to be conditionally
self-accepting or are you going to love
yourself and this video is going to talk
about how to do the second thing we are
not talking here about how to be mean to
yourself and Bully yourself into
achieving your goals not what this video
is about this video is about learning
how to love yourself at every stage of
the process even when you have just
failed tremendously at something even
when you are disgusted with yourself
even when you are deeply unhappy with
where you have arrived in life this
video is about seeing yourself staying
present with yourself and accepting
yourself in those moments and that is so
not easy and that's why so few people
really do have that self-love right it's
hard it is hard to show up for ourselves
in the moments when we would rather jump
ship and jumping ship often looks like
going okay I don't really like what what
I'm what's going on with me right now so
uh I going to go find someone else to
approve of me and decide that I will
only feel warm and conditional
acceptance for myself again once someone
else approves of me once someone else
loves me once the world thinks that I am
beautiful and successful and worth being
admired that's jumping ship on our
self-love a little bit earlier this year
I was going through this phase where I
was starting to feel um a weird sense of
resentment towards some of my friends
and these were awesome people who were
super there for me during a period of my
life that was very difficult and yet
this weird part of me started feeling
like I want some space from these people
I want them to stop being so present and
attentive with me was very bizarre so I
brought it into therapy and my therapist
was like do you think that your inner
child feels jealous of your friends
because right now you are Outsourcing a
lot of your needs for comfort and warmth
and affection to those people and you
are not giving yourself a lot of those
things it seems like you're kind of
losing touch a little bit with yourself
and that felt very true for me I didn't
want to deal with having to see and love
and validate myself at that time I was
like ah someone else just do it for me
but what message is that sending to the
child inside of me right if every time
things get tough I'm like go live with
your aunt like go live with my friends
for a while they'll validate and support
you I'm going to be here hating myself
when I'm left alone right it doesn't
work like that you cannot allow your
self love to come from other people you
got to give it to yourself I know that's
so cliche and annoying to hear but it's
true if you cannot be present with
yourself when things are difficult and
say I'm staying present for you I'm
staying on your team I'm looking at the
problems in your life and I'm saying
let's tackle This Together self and
inner child then you're not being a
loving parent to the little child that
lives inside of you I was listening to
this song by Muna Muna Muna wow I don't
I don't know how to say the band name
let me
check hey this is Bill and you should
know us M
Muna uh I was listening to this song by
Muna earlier who's a band that become
obsessed with this year obsessed and
they had a single that came out in I
think it was their 2019 album called
number one fan and there's this line in
it it's this awesome like Bop about
self- Lov when I say I was listening to
it earlier what I mean is I spent a full
three hours playing this song on Loop
dancing around my apartment to it my
neighbors must hate me and Muna by now
uh but there's this line in it that's so
good that goes I've been staring at
myself in the mirror going don't leave
me now and that is the exact sentiment
that I think we all need when we are at
the worst we need to be able to stand in
the mirror look ourselves in the eye and
go I am not going anywhere for you right
now I am not going to abandon you in
this painful place you're in I am not
going to tell you that I will only love
you again once things are better this is
where it matters this is where you are
picking up the heavy weight of self-love
right it's so easy to love yourself on
the days when everything is sunny and
everything's going your way and you look
super impressive to the outside world it
is easy to show up for yourself on those
days any idot could love themselves on
those days right the people who actually
know how to do it know how to look at
themselves in their worst moment and
pick up that heavy ass weight of self-
Lov in that moment right even now I will
not abandon you even now I will show up
for you and I will choose what is
healthy for you I will not jump ship on
you I will not Outsource that self-love
I will listen to what you need I will
listen in this moment to what my inner
child needs and I will give that to my
inner child without judgment and the
reason this is so important is because
often I believe our failures the things
we get wrong the things that drive us
off the rails in life are often our
inner children screaming at us there's
something wrong right anything that we
see as self-sabotage I believe is often
some other repressed part of our psyche
screaming at us to have a need met and
if the second things go wrong we just go
into self-hatred mode and start self-
abandoning like crazy we will never
figure out what that need was that needs
fulfilling and how to give it to
ourselves and when we find a way to do
that then we can start building
ourselves towards that healthy
equilibrium where we are actually
showing up for our own needs giving
ourselves what we want and sustainably
working in a healthier Direction so
earlier this year I went through a
period where I was struggling a lot with
some personal stuff that was going on in
my life and I started overeating a lot
and drinking I went through a period of
about 2 years of no drinking and then I
kind of tued myself back into it and was
like nah no no I can like drink
sometimes now but it got to a point
where I was like now I'm just drinking
for the sake of drinking I'm eating for
the sake of eating I am totally
dissociated from my body and what my
body wants and that doesn't feel good
but there's this part of me that's like
compulsively doing it and I can't figure
out why and it wasn't until I got really
quiet with myself and was like okay I'm
going to listen I'm just gonna pay some
attention to my inner child and ask her
what's up and have a conversation with
her and what she had to say in uh much
more words than this is that I was
jumping ship a lot I was Outsourcing my
self-esteem a lot I was Outsourcing my
needs for Comfort a lot I was trying to
rely on the outside world to make me
feel steady and secure and grounded in a
time of my life when I am not feeling
steady or secure or grounded and I had
to stop and figure out what would mean
to make myself feel steady secure and
grounded without anyone else's help and
I had to commit myself which meant
actually making some drastic changes to
creating a space for myself where I felt
those things independent of anyone
else's input before I was able to get
back on track comfortably and easily
with my health there's another direction
that could have gone in right I could
have gone ooh I'm not liking the way I
feel about myself I'm not liking the way
my body looks right now I'm going to go
try to get a bunch of validation out of
other people to make me feel better
about those things and that would have
worked intermittently and passively and
in the meantime this chronic sense of
resistance would have been happening in
my body between the part of me that
wanted my own attention my own love my
own support through this time and the
part of me that wanted to jump ship and
just get everybody else to do that work
for me and the problem probably would
have kept getting worse but at the end
of the day it turned out what I needed
was to stop traveling I was traveling
for a while and that worked for me for a
period and then stopped working I needed
to come home I needed to find a bunch of
ways to find love and acceptance and
support from people without drinking or
partying with them because I'm too
old for that and I don't enjoy
it anymore and I needed to feed myself
healthy food and ground myself in
physical activity which feels so nice
for my body and I needed to get good
sleeps and I needed to ask for some
extensions on my school assignments and
ask for help with some things that I was
struggling with and doing all of that
stuff required adjusting some of my
self- expect expectations and I think
that honestly that is half the battle a
lot of the time with self-love is
allowing the expectations that we hold
for ourselves to change when our
feelings are kind of railing against
them right I really wanted to graduate
at the top of my class I had to change
that expectation because I was not
willing to sacrifice my health for it I
really wanted to go have a fun summer in
Europe and I had to change that
expectation for myself because my Health
was more important than that it's so
tempting to feel like once we get all of
these needs in our external environment
satisfied then we are going to be happy
and we are going to be at peace but I
imagine that the truest measure of
whether we are happy and doing well and
at peace is can you just sit in a room
alone with yourself and like who you
are and feel like your own company is
chill and cool and great and you don't
have to run away from yourself I think
that's the only real measure of if we're
doing well and if we're doing okay and
if we're loving ourselves is how does it
feel when nothing else is going on when
there's no distractions what's it like
in your body are you at home in your
body and in your mind and in your soul
or are you just always looking for that
Escape right and I'm not trying to shame
anyone for looking for the Escape either
I spent most of my life looking for like
which problems I could solve and which
things I could achieve and what I could
do and experience and build and control
in my environment in order to make
myself feel okay right I get it it's so
natural to reach like that and it takes
a lot of work and a lot of practice and
kind of like a lifetime of trying to get
to that place where we just feel okay
when we're with ourselves but here's
kind of what I like to think of when I
feel like I've messed something up when
I've handled a situation in a way that
I'm not proud of when I have failed at
something when I have had to lower my
own standards for performance in some
way I like to remind myself that I am
constant
in the process of maturing and if you
believe you are not constantly in the
process of maturing that is a giant ass
self- red flag cuz I don't care who you
are I don't care how old you are I don't
care how much work you've done we are
hopefully chronically in the process of
learning how to show up in the world in
a better way and shaming myself for
getting things wrong is kind of like
shaming a baby for puking if you have a
baby it's going to throw up all the time
why I don't actually know why do babies
puke so much is it like a like a
sphincter issue like it's not strong
enough yet or is it something to do with
their stomach not being able to hold and
digest food properly if you guys know
why babies puke as much as they do
please leave it in the comments but the
point is there's some physical reason
that is outside of the baby's control
why it has to throw up after feeding
right so you as its parent have two
choices you can shame and be cruel
towards your baby and tell it it's
disgusting every time it pukes and then
it's going to grow up with all these
like weird mental health issues and
digestive problems probably or you can
accept that your baby developmentally is
not capable of eating without puking yet
and that in time your baby will become
capable of eating without puking but in
the meantime the choice you have is do
you clean up your baby's puke while
shaming and blaming your baby for
something that is beyond their control
or do you clean up your baby's puke
while telling your baby it's okay that
you puked this is totally normal for the
point of your development that you're at
and I completely love you and I will
clean up your puke 5,000 more times
because you are growing and growing
babies puke this is the same attitude we
can take to our own failures like
thinking that we should be anywhere in
terms of our development that we're just
not is as useless as shaming a baby for
puking before they are ready to stop
puking we just are where we are and we
are making the best decisions we're
capable of making with the information
that we have and if you believe that you
have enough information to to be making
a better decision then great you can
make it next time and this time clean up
your damn puke with self-love and tell
yourself cool you tried for something
you puked it up it didn't work that's
fine I'll clean up your puke again I
will clean up your puke 5,000 more times
if that's how many times it takes for
you to learn a lesson that you need to
learn there's some muscle inside of you
that is not strong enough yet just like
I'm imagining that the baby's sphincter
isn't strong enough yet right it just
can't perform that action yet so until
it can I will keep holding you and I
will keep cleaning up your puke that is
self-love right conditional
self-acceptance is telling ourselves if
you ever puke again I'm going to hate
you forever and then what's going to
happen is you're just going to like puke
in your mouth and swallow it and you're
going to get all emotionally ill inside
mess up be present for yourself in your
mess ups clean up the mess ups right I'm
not saying let your life go to and
don't deal with the consequences of any
of your actions quite the opposite I'm
saying deal with the consequences of
every single one of your actions clean
up the puke every single time and accept
and love the part of you that is trying
to strengthen that muscle and is not
strong enough yet accept that do not
shame yourself for not having a
well-developed sphincter yet I think I
just like the word sphincter it's funny
word you never use that word unless I
guess if you're like a throat doctor or
something you would use that um but yeah
you cannot develop certain emotional
skills without trying a bunch of times
and making a bunch of messes and if
that's happening it doesn't mean you
have to say like yeah I love this mess I
love the puke it just means you have to
be loving towards yourself as you try
and fail and clean up your own messes
again and again and again and again and
again all that means is that you are in
the process of maturing and of growing
new muscles and of strengthening
internally I think such a humongous part
of self-love is just having complete
acceptance for ourselves in the areas
that we are not acing yet in the areas
that it feels like we should be doing
well at by now but aren't or the areas
where we used to be doing well and now
aren't maybe that's our call to get
interested in what changed right
something else came up that now made
this area a little bit harder to deal
with or a little bit harder to regulate
ourselves around and again if you're a
good parent to your kid and let's say
they start getting worse marks at school
or getting into fights all the time
you're not just going to go what's wrong
with you change you're going to go huh
is my child experiencing stress in other
areas is my child getting enough sleep
is my child feeling stressed or they
being bullied you're going to look at
the entire ecosystem of your child's
life and try to figure out what's going
on for them in a way that's causing them
to act out in other ways and that's
often how it works for ourselves as
adults too for a while things go well
it's easy to keep to our routines and
healthy coping mechanisms it's easy to
get along well with other people and
then things shift and we're not always
conscious of when when those shifts
happen and we start reacting differently
right but we can hold space in an ideal
world for looking at oursel as part of
an ecosystem and figuring out what's
changed in our ecosystem that is now
causing us to react differently and then
we can do some work on that but just
shaming ourselves and saying that it is
all our fault that we're acting in a way
we're not proud of probably isn't going
to work if we're still constantly
getting triggered then it's just going
to be a shame spiral as we're constantly
hating ourselves for doing something and
then not having another to do it so
sometimes I find it helpful to remember
that hard times just deplete our ego
strength when we are going through
something difficult it's kind of like we
are running an emotional marathon and
it's like if someone stops you and goes
hey do 400 Jumping Jacks in the middle
of a marathon it's going to be a lot
harder than it normally is because you
have already depleted so much of your
body's energy and emotionally the same
thing happens when we are dealing with
emotional issues right we don't always
have as much ego strength as we normally
have and so we need to be extra
compassionate and understanding with
ourselves during those times we have to
be willing to be very very
non-judgmental if we are making messes a
little bit more often right that's
probably going to happen it probably
just means you are reaching a really
tough part of that race and you know
what the only reason problems crop up
for us in the first place is because we
are in the race to start with the only
way we're ever going to not mess up at
all is if we are not trying if we're not
going for anything if we are not
engaging with our Liv lives fully and
completely and enthusiastically that's
the only way we're ever going to save
ourselves from messing up in any
capacity so this year of my life I'm
finding a lot of freedom and just being
like damn I running an emotional
marathon and you know what it makes
total sense that I'm really tired it
makes total sense that my judgment is
impaired sometimes it makes total sense
that I'm making the wrong call a lot of
my energy is going towards this Marathon
I'm running maybe I need more rest
breaks maybe I need to adjust the time
that I've told myself I'm going to
finish the race in and again a lot of
the time it's really difficult to go oo
I'm going to lessen my expectations for
myself but if you want to engage in true
self-love you're going to have to be
willing to do that you're going to have
to be willing to put that feeling of I
am okay with myself in my life when I'm
sitting in a room alone with myself
above everything else every external
achievement or goal or thing that you
think is going to get you to this place
where you never think ill of yourself
again all of that every single piece of
it has to be seconded to your
willingness to fight to get yourself to
a place where you can just sit alone in
a room with yourself and be pretty damn
happy with that company I mean the most
perfect person in the world could come
along and say they're ready to validate
you you just have to give up this little
piece of yourself that feels very
important to you you have to be willing
to go nope keeping that piece of myself
that feels important to me the most
incredible opportunity could come your
way and it could say look I'm going to
grant you all of your Earthly dreams of
Fame and success and wealth but you're
going to need to sacrifice a lot of your
health and emotional stability and
well-being and you're going to have to
go no I'm more important than that you
have to be willing to not jump ship at
any cost to get to that place of self-
Lov because once you get there other
people can criticize you other people
can deny you opportunities other people
can tell you everything they think about
you that is unpleasant or angry or wrong
and it's still going to be okay for you
because you're not self- abandoning
you're not replacing what you think
about yourself with what other people
think of you so you can have wonderful
and growing and Incredibly deep and Rich
relationships only with people who are
willing to accept and hold space for the
full entire range of you like you are
holding space for the full entire range
of you because that's love right when we
love ourselves at our best and at our
worst we naturally learn to only accept
love from people who also love us at our
best and our worst but when we can Al
accept ourselves we also seek out
relationships with people who only
conditionally accept us too because
that's what we're used to that's what
matches up and uh here's the kicker I
fully believe until you unconditionally
love yourself and know how to sit with
yourself in your worst most shameful
most scary moments and be a source of
comfort and acceptance and encouragement
for yourself you also don't really know
how to do that with other people we can
always only ever meet people as deeply
as we have met ourselves right so if we
want to love our partners our friends
our children our first job our first job
has to be learning to love the full and
entire range of who we are because we
cannot pass on what we don't have within
us so when I say I love you at the end
of these videos what I mean is I am
rooting for you when you are at your
absolute best and I am rooting for you
when you are at your absolute worst and
that I hope that you are showing up for
your s that way too so with that I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves really really deeply and I
will see you back here again sometime in
the nearish
future no worries got me no I got no
problems no problems I can see