hey guys Heidi Priebe here welcome back
to my channel I wanted to start this
video by telling you a story about a
mistake I made and I had a really weird
experience like processing this mistake
because it was very different from my
past experiences of making a mistake and
just being like
Heidi you are completely useless
um it was actually quite nicely the
opposite of that
so basically earlier this year I picked
up a project I agreed to a project that
at the time when I knew I was agreeing
to this project I was like I don't have
time or resources for this project like
I knew
and there was certain things that I
found very enticing certain skills I
wanted to build through taking on this
project
and I was like you know what I'll just
say yes I will say yes and figure it out
and a lot of times in my life that works
out pretty well for me this time Flash
Forward several months later it did not
I had to drop the project I got behind
on like some schoolwork and other
commitments because I'd spend so much
time trying to work on this other thing
and I had this moment with myself after
I had let the team in question know that
I was going to need to take myself off
the project where it was like I could
hear a voice in my head apologizing to
myself
almost as if like one part of me was
saying to another part hey I'm sorry
that I wasted your time and resources I
knew at the beginning I knew the moment
I said yes to that project that I did
not have the capacity to take it on and
to finish it and to not get behind on
all this other stuff and I'm sorry that
I put you through that that I stressed
you out that I made you stay up late at
night that I did not respect your time
and energy and resources and the ways
that you had thought carefully about how
you wanted to allocate them at the
beginning of this year
and I was like that is one of the
weirder experiences I've ever had is the
feeling of listening to part of myself
spontaneously apologize to another part
of myself
and I think that that was a really cool
sign of
um just getting somewhere with like my
inner work around self-love and
self-compassion and rather than berating
myself and telling myself I should have
known better the predominant voice in my
head was like yeah I did know better and
I let you down part of you that deserves
comfort and spare time and spare
resources and I'm sorry
and it made me think about how little we
talk about
self-apologizing like we talk a lot
about apologizing to other people but
normally when we let ourselves down what
we do instead of apologizing to
ourselves the way we would to a friend
who deserves to hear an apology when we
have done something that hurt them we go
instantly to self-criticism right we're
like I should have known better I was
such an idiot I should never have taken
that on I never get anything right and
we don't show ourselves True
self-compassion by acknowledging the
impact that we have had on ourselves by
treating ourselves in a way that we knew
was not necessarily the most respectful
and giving ourselves a genuine apology
so that's what we're talking about today
how to apologize to yourself and by the
way there's this thing going around
earlier this year that was like what's
your apology language and it broke down
apologies into all these different
components which I thought was cool like
I thought that the breaking down of a
apologizing was a neat idea but I was
like all of these kind of matter like
the questionnaire asked you to pick
between things like do you like when
someone acknowledges that they hurt your
feelings or do you like when they fix
the situation so you know it won't
happen again and I'm like both of those
things need to happen for an apology to
be complete so it's not about apology
language it sounds like you're just
fragmenting what could otherwise be a
really beautiful holistic healing
apology that you could give to someone
else and saying like what part of it do
you want so in this video we're going to
talk about how to give a holistic
apology to yourself step one of five
that I made up and Loosely stole from
the apology languages Express remorse
towards yourself so this step is all
about admitting to yourself and
acknowledging to yourself that your
feelings matter the situations you
choose to put yourself in in life and
the way that you choose to spend your
time and money and energy and resources
those things are important and if you
have made a bad calculation and you have
spent those things unwisely you need to
acknowledge that and you need to look at
yourself and go I squandered something
important you have but one life on God's
green earth and I wasted part of your
life or I did something that I am not in
retrospect happy that I did with your
life and I am sorry because your life
matters this step is about acknowledging
that you matter that the way that you
spend your time your energy your
resources it matters it's important it's
not frivolous and if you have squandered
some component of that you owe it to
yourself to your inner child to say I'm
sorry I should not have done that I
should be careful when I think about the
situations I put you in I should be
careful when I think about the way I'm
using your time I should be careful
about the things I ask you to invest in
and show up to day after day after day
these things matter because they make an
impact on you as a human being and
sometimes when I'm trying to figure out
like do I owe myself an apology or not I
think about what if I were a child like
what if I were a child who I were
responsible for taking care of and I
think about the situations that I put
myself in and I'm like would I put a
child who I loved in that situation
would I put them in a situation that
would stress them out to the point where
they weren't getting enough sleep or
they weren't eating healthily or they
were experiencing chronic stress would I
put them in a situation where someone
else were being rude or inconsiderate or
talking down to them and if you would
not put a child who you love in the
situation that you put yourself in you
probably owe the child in yourself in
apology right step one Express remorse
recognize that the situation you put
yourself in was not a particularly kind
one to put yourself in and this is
different than saying don't push
yourself right there are lots of ways in
which we push and challenge ourselves to
grow and we might end up not sleeping
much for a little period of time while
we're working on something we're excited
about or we might get into conflicts
that is really important to work through
but this is about recognizing when we
have put ourselves in situations that we
know are disrespectful to ourselves
where the cost-benefit analysis of the
situation we're in doesn't quite work
out in our favor and we keep engaging
with it anyway step two show that you
understand what you did wrong and why so
at this step what I encourage you to do
is get really real with yourself about
why you did the thing that you did that
you now need to apologize to yourself
for and I think this is an important
component of apologizing to other people
too right when people just quickly
apologize as soon as we're mad at them
or as soon as we express discontent with
something they did but they don't really
seem to understand what led to them
doing that thing the apology doesn't
really feel sincere because it's kind of
like well I know next time you're just
going to do the same thing again because
I don't think you actually have an idea
of what the Dynamics behind this
situation was
and the same is true for ourselves right
if I took on this project Knowing damn
well at the time that I did not have the
resources to complete it how do I know
I'm not going to do that again if I had
that gut intuition at the beginning and
I didn't listen to it how do I know
things will be different in the future
so this step is about examining the
context that led you to making the
mistake that you made so maybe some part
of me in this area of myself I don't
really want to look at or admit actually
kind of wanted this project as a
distraction from other things that were
more important maybe I kind of wanted a
reason to not look at more difficult
things in my life and if I can admit
that to myself I'm going to be a lot
less likely to make that mistake again
than if I tell myself oh I should have
known better but I didn't and I did it
for no reason that's never the case we
like always more or less know the reason
right or maybe I took on this project
because I thought that completing it
would make me look look really good to
other people and I was in a phase of my
life where my self-esteem wasn't doing
great and I wanted something to give me
a boost maybe I took on this project
because I was feeling avoidant and I
wanted a reason to opt out of a bunch of
social engagements for a while the more
clear we get on the secondary reasons
behind why we did what we did the more
we can isolate those variables that are
going to be kind of danger zones for us
repeating the mistake in the future
right so the more honest we can be with
ourselves and the more we can explain to
ourselves without judgment why we did
what we did the more self-trust we start
to build because now we're not letting
ourselves get away with anything we're
getting really clear on the reasons why
we did what we did and we are not
committing the cardinal sin of lying to
ourselves about our own motivations
because that's where stuff gets really
dicey step three is kind of the flip
side of step two which is acknowledge
what you didn't get wrong
so I read this blog years and years ago
and unfortunately I completely forget
who wrote it
um but it was talking about how when we
fail we're often a lot closer to success
than we realized so often we look back
at failures and we only look at what did
I miss right what did I get wrong where
did I fail to show up where I could have
shown up and we don't look at the 80
percent of the thing that we got right
we don't look at how overwhelmingly we
may have been on the right path we just
didn't have all of the skills or
resources or time or energy or knowledge
and understanding that we needed to get
to the end right this can apply to jobs
it can also apply to personal
relationships like I see a lot of people
coming out of let's say long-term
romantic relationships and they see the
entire thing as this terrible failure
and it's like well if you spent years in
that relationship there's probably a lot
of really great stuff that went right in
that relationship there's probably a lot
of ways you guys found to to make each
other laugh and to support each other
and to really celebrate your lives
together and that stuff is equally if
not more important than what you did
wrong that led to the downfall right
that stuff really needs to be remembered
and to not be thrown out with the bath
water and the same is true of any
mistake it's important to look not just
at what did I do wrong but what was I
getting right in the process sometimes I
think it might even be helpful to just
make a little like t-chart things I got
wrong things I got right and you're
showing yourself in that process that
you are not in epic failure you are
someone who tries very hard and you win
some you lose some but you want to be
able to extract the wins from the losses
and keep those going forward step four
make any amends and repair any damage
that you have caused to other people so
depending on what the mistake is you
might have to do a whole ass apology
tour or you might have absolutely nobody
to apologize to but yourself but this
step is really important because when it
comes to your own sense of alignment and
self-esteem you need to make sure that
you are showing up in the world in a way
that is congruent with the way that you
are feeling and thinking internally so
if you have made a mistake where you let
yourself down and in the process you let
someone else down this step is about
taking the time to acknowledge that to
the other person or people involved and
doing whatever you can to make right by
them and if you want you can borrow the
structure of this video to make your
apology to them because apologizing to
other people and apologizing to yourself
in my opinion should be not that
different at all step five make a plan
to address the same situation
differently in the future so this is
harking back to point number two right
where you looked at why you did the
thing you did now you owe it to yourself
to take it a step further and help
yourself come up with alternate
solutions to similar problems going
forward again I feel like all of us have
had at least a situation where someone
is sitting in front of us apologizing
and we're just looking at them being
like I know you're going to do it again
I know the next time we're in this
situation you will behave in the exact
same way don't be that person to
yourself do not be the person who is
sitting there lying to their own face
okay if you cannot change and show up
differently for yourself no one else is
ever going to so you have to get this
right from the inside go back to
everything you wrote down in Step number
two every hidden motivation every
obscured fact everything that led you to
make this decision that in retrospect
you know you should not have made and
find a better way to deal with every
single one of those problems in the
future in a way that actually addresses
those unmet needs holistically so you
know if this situation comes up again I
will have a better way to handle it
write down an action plan that is
realistic not one that leaves out half
of your needs which you might then cave
to in the moment the next time a
decision or a crisis Point comes up
figure out a way to incorporate the
conflicting needs that led you to make
the wrong decision in the first place
and work towards a place where next time
a similar decision comes along you now
have a 360 degree view of the situation
and you know a better more comprehensive
solution to it alright this video is
uncharacteristically short for me but I
think I'm going to keep it at that that
is my five-step self-apology process
I also chose to buy myself a cake me and
my closest cousin who's also one of my
like best friends uh when we were around
20 years old we started this practice of
apologizing to each other with cakes
anytime we had a fight needed to make up
with each other so whichever one of us
was in the wrong would go to the store
and get a cake and get them to write
like sorry for the whatever went wrong
on the cake so with this project I was
talking about at the beginning of this
video I actually the day I handed it
back and was like I cannot finish this
I'm sorry uh I went to the store and
bought myself a cake and wrote sorry for
taking on that project on the cake and
then I had some friends over because I'm
not eating sugar at the moment and I got
them to eat the cake on my behalf but I
actually encourage you to find something
like that that really memorializes and
makes it clear to yourself explicitly
clear that you are not getting away with
your own behavior you have made a
mistake you are deeply acknowledging it
and from this point forward you have a
better way of dealing with it alright
let me know your guys thoughts on this
in the comments of this video as always
I love you I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]