hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here this week on this
channel we are talking about Shadow work
so Shadow work is essentially
recognizing the parts of ourselves that
we have shoved out of our own conscious
awareness but that are nonetheless
impacting our lives in significant ways
now the term Shadow work originally
comes from Carl Young and Carl Young
talked about not just the personal
Shadow so what we leave out of our
awareness about ourselves and our
personality but also the collective
Shadow so what we as a social group of
any sort tend to neglect to accept and
integrate into the kind of group
identity and as this week goes on what I
want to do is pick on some things that I
think are in the collective Shadow at
this point in time when something's in
the collective Shadow it can actually be
the scariest and most threatening to in
integrate that into our personal self
concept because being socially
ostracized is a very real threat right
we are social creatures we have adapted
to exist in Social environments and so
we're all naturally going to be the most
hesitant to accept the parts of
ourselves that we believe would get us
rejected from whatever social groups
we're a part of and today I want to
directly address one of those
experiences that I believe is currently
in the collective Shadow which is the
experience of admitting that you are
wrong so this could be either being
literally factually wrong about
something so stating something or
interpreting a set of data in a way that
you later learned is not a reflection of
the reality of that situation or doing
something that you or other people
perceive to be morally wrong if you have
not been living under a rock for the
past 10 years you know that we live in
the middle of cancel culture and
sometimes when we cancel someone we are
genuinely picking up on an anti-social
pattern of behavior so someone like
Harvey Weinstein who genuinely hurt a
lot of people it makes total sense to
hold accountable for his actions but
there's also a kind of Glee that you see
very often especially on the recesses of
the internet when someone famous does
something that we even slightly consider
to be morally wrong and a lot of people
will pretend oh I'm just looking out for
the greater social good when in reality
we are way over punishing even small
transgressions and or just not at all
making room for a nuanced conversation
about those transgressions including
when the person is genuinely wanting to
do better so this experience of being
wrong of saying the wrong thing or doing
something that in hindsight is perceived
as morally wrong seems to be very much
in the collective Shadow it is a social
threat in many ways to admit that you
are wrong because we are so ruthless
about out people doing a wrong thing
again even with relatively minor
transgressions that people genuinely
want to grow from so it makes sense that
for a lot of people in the current
social environment we have there is a
giant threat response that comes online
in the form of defensiveness when we
start to even entertain the idea that
maybe we have been wrong about something
when a threat response is online we are
not calmly rooting through the facts to
figure out true from false we are
thinking about how to protect ourselves
and if the way to protect ourselves from
being socially outcasted is to not be
wrong our mind is going to be working
very quickly to try to convince us that
we are not wrong we are right even if we
kind of know deep down that that is not
true so in this video what I want to do
is talk about how we can learn to accept
that we have done something wrong or
stated something that is inaccurate
while managing that social threat
because that social threat is often
quite real and so pretending it's not
doesn't really do anything for us what
we have to learn is to integrate the
fact that that shadow exists and so does
each of our individual abilities to be
wrong or to get something wrong or to
make a mistake and the problem is that
when something is in the collective
Shadow it really serves us to keep it in
our personal Shadow as well because
again we develop our shadow selves as a
product of what is acceptable or not
acceptable in our social environments so
if we want to create a society where we
are more comfortable dwelling in nuanced
conversations and allowing forgiveness
and space for people to reconsider their
beliefs without feeling defensive my
guess is that our best bet is to start
doing that on a personal level so that
it gets easier for us to translate that
outwards so how do we work internally
with the feeling of realizing we are
wrong without canceling ourselves inside
of our own minds so what does that mean
it means keeping a sense of self-respect
alive even in the face of realizing that
we have thought or done something wrong
and for the rest of the video we're
going to be talking about how to do
exactly that I personally believe that
the number one way to kind of combat
this fear of being wrong is learning to
preserve your dignity in the face of
recognizing that you are wrong so we're
refusing to listen to that kind of
public opinion of if you are wrong it
means you are a treacherous terrible
person who wants bad things to happen
and who deserves to be shamed and
outcasted we have to learn to tell
ourselves a new story about what it
means to be wrong if we want to stand
even half a chance at actually
approaching our lives with moral and
intellectual honesty so what I view is
kind of step one in the process of
preserving your dignity in the face of
realizing that you're wrong is learning
to separate out what it actually feels
like for you to realize that you are
wrong about something from the
experience sense of fawning so fawning
is a threat response that comes online
When We Fear we are about to have some
sort of really negative personal
consequence as a virtue of what we have
recently done so if I say something that
I believe to be true and someone goes
you're wrong and starts laying into me
about why I am wrong I might interpret
that as a very extreme social threat
depending on what kind of a relationship
I have with this person with myself and
with the information at hand when we are
in a fond response we are trying to keep
ourselves safe at any cost so our brains
are not necessarily measuring the
information carefully and methodically
the way that we might be approaching the
information when we are alone with it if
someone is yelling at us that we are
wrong we might freak out listen to what
they're saying and our brain might find
a way to convince us that they are right
in that moment because we see agreeing
with them and appeasing them as the only
way to escape the threat and again that
doesn't necessarily mean there's a real
threat involved in US disagreeing with
them but it might right there might be a
very real social threat active in
disagreeing with this person so
sometimes if we are very quickly
changing our opinion on something
because someone is angrily disagreeing
with us it's possible that we're in a
fun response so we are feeling
threatened versus the feeling of being
wrong of noticing that we have made an
inaccurate evaluation of a scenario or
we have made a mistake that we truly
believe even when we are alone with
ourselves to be a mistake is a very
different experience and step one in
learning to be wrong with dignity
involves learning to separate out what
is a fond response from what is the
feeling of genuinely realizing I have
done something wrong and this takes a
lot of time and work to parse apart a
place I recommend starting is just
noticing the situations in which you
very quickly change your opinion about
something and then later on go wait a
minute now I feel very differently or I
see things very differently now that I
have some space from that difficult
interaction action I see now that I was
actually just kind of appeasing this
other person by buying into their side
of things temporarily even though in
that moment I believed I was in the
wrong and if you can compile enough of
these instances for yourself you start
to notice patterns around when you tend
to Fawn Ergo when you might be more
susceptible to it also notice what does
it feel like in the moments when you are
alone with yourself and you're realizing
through reflection or through receiving
new information that you missed a
perspective and now you've changed your
mind about something based on new
information learn to tune in as much as
you possibly can to the difference
between those two situations so that you
start to get a bigger picture that helps
you distinguish in the future when you
might be fawning and when it might be
important for you to take a step back
and consider the information at hand
more deeply before giving a response
versus when you are genuinely realizing
that you are wrong about something and
you now truly even when you are alone
with yourself believes something
different so when I'm wrong about
something I try to give myself the grace
of first experiencing it as a quiet
moment that I have with myself
so if I'm in a very heated interaction
with someone else and I realize in the
middle of that interaction actually I
was wrong about this thing and I know
that because I can feel it in my body
the same way I feel it when I'm alone
with myself reevaluating old information
but if I think that admitting that in
this moment is going to be met with a
lot of shame or some very negative
social consequence that I'm going to
struggle to deal with I give myself the
grace of excusing myself from that
interaction saying that I need time to
think and then tending to that feeling
Within Myself in a compassionate way
letting myself know that it's okay and
safe in myself to be wrong about
something and that I am not going to
criticize or judge myself for not
getting things right initially which
kind of naturally Blends into the next
step of this process which is once you
have realized you're wrong about
something as much as you're able to
separate out being wrong having
incorrect information or making a
mistake from the stories that you tell
yourself about what it means about you
as a person that you are wrong so if
you're not really sure what I mean by
this try taking out a notebook and just
writing down the prompt if I am wrong
that means dot dot dot and writing as
quickly as you can whatever comes to
mind that your instinctual self believes
is going to be true about you if you
make a mistake or get something wrong
now that does not mean that those things
are true but it's good to have an
awareness of what you are conflating
with the experience of being wrong if I
believe if I am wrong it means I am a
terrible person who doesn't deserve to
have any friends or close relationships
I'm going to be working overtime to
convince myself I am not wrong even if I
kind of know in my gut that I am right
so separating out those stories can be
really instrumental in the process of
learning to accept when we are wrong by
removing as much of the intra personal
threat from it as possible and it might
be helpful in this process to just
notice where those stories came from ask
yourself why it may have been important
for the people in your early environment
to shame or blame or ostracize you when
you were wrong what threat response
might have been online for those people
that caused them to behave in that way
and can you uninvest yourself from those
threats that were active for them and
you can then apply that to the current
experience of being wrong so if other
people in your environment genuinely
seem to take Glee or joy in the thought
of you getting something wrong or making
a mistake that might be a very real
social threat that is happening for you
in real time but you can also ask
yourself why is it so important to these
people that I am wrong and why does it
seem to be important to them to
dehumanize me as a result of my being
wrong and the reason you're doing this
isn't to forgive other people for
abusive or bullying Behavior it's so
that you can separate out in your own
mind someone else's projections from the
truth about your character most of the
time when people are arguing in these
really intense kind of high stakes
insulting ways it's because both people
have a very strong very active story
about what it means to be right or wrong
about that thing and a lot of it is
really not that personal at the end of
the day everyone is wrong sometimes we
are all at various points in time
limited buyer perspectives and the
information that we currently have we
are always in some way lacking the full
picture that's just what it is to be
alive in reality the art of being wrong
and accepting and integrating new
information is the art of being open to
learning in a way that does not stagnate
which is an inherently cool way to live
in my opinion it's not an undignified
position the people who are able to
challenge their own perspectives realize
when they're wrong and grow from that
are the people who in the long run get
the furthest in life someone else
shaming you for being wrong almost
definitely has way more to do with them
than it does to do with you but it
doesn't always feel like that in the
moment which is why we need to take the
opportunity to preserve our own
self-respect and dignity in the face of
realizing that we've been wrong about
something which is exactly what step
three in this process is tend to your
own dignity when you realize that you
have gotten something wrong your dignity
matters immensely in this moment and
there is nothing wrong with reminding
yourself of that in fact I would
actively encourage you to now your
dignity is not your narcissism so it
does not mean mounting your high horse
it means being able to maintain a sense
of humility and self-respect
simultaneously so take some time to tend
to your own emotions around the fact
that you are wrong about something it's
okay to feel a bit bad for yourself and
metabolize a little bit of shame or
whatever else it is that you're feeling
even if being wrong means that you owe
an apology to someone else I still think
it's really important to first process
it internally or else the apology you
give isn't going to be as integrated
Ergo is effective as the one that you
could give if you have first regulated
your own emotions around all of it so
instead of telling yourself the story I
was wrong I'm an idiot I always mess
things up I don't deserve any of the
relationships I have try telling
yourself the true story
I was wrong because I was working with
the information that I had at the time
which was incomplete I was wrong because
my thinking was biased in a way that I
can now see more clearly I was listening
to the podcast of a friend of mine whose
name is AJ Bond who does a ton of work
with toxic shame and I will link it in
the description of this video if you
want to check that podcast out where he
was talking about how shame sometimes
has us interpreting past actions as
though we knew all along what was going
to happen so in Psychology we call this
the hindsight bias the idea that because
we can see in retrospect how a series of
events played out we kind of project our
current understanding of the situation
onto our past selves and go oh I knew it
all along right when in reality we
didn't always know the outcome even if
we knew that the outcome was one of the
possible outcomes of what was going to
happen if we pursued a given course of
action we probably didn't know for sure
that it was going to turn out in the way
that it did but when shame comes online
it can be very easy to convince
ourselves that we intentionally got
something wrong or made a mistake
because now in light of new information
we see information that we had two weeks
ago or a year ago or whatever it is in a
new light forgetting that at that point
in time the way we were interpreting
that information was limited by the
other information that we had so just
because we see something a different way
now doesn't mean we were capable of
seeing it that way back at the time when
we were making these decisions around it
and that's a really important thing to
remind ourselves of in order to preserve
our own integrity and dignity when we
are wrong so I remember having this play
out interpersonally one time and I think
that this is not an uncommon occurrence
where I was in a close relationship with
someone and I want to be clear that this
just happens in relationships neither
myself nor the other person had
malicious intent in this interaction but
there's this issue we had been arguing
about and not seeing eye to eye on for
some time and I was quite like firm in
my position like I was like I really
have some knowledge here that I believe
you're not fully seeing and I've been
holding tight to that and then we have
this long conversation where throughout
the course of the conversation this
person gave me a whole bunch of
information that I didn't previously
have and at the end of the conversation
I was like yeah actually I think you're
right what you're saying and your
interpretation of this data makes more
sense than my previous interpretation
even though for so long I was so
hell-bent on my interpretation I didn't
say it like as cleanly as that but that
was the gist of it and then they looked
at me and I imagine saw the opportunity
to kind of get on a high horse a bit
again as we all do sometimes and went
yeah and I can't believe you spent so
long trying to convince me of the
opposite
and I was like well I can I can believe
I spent so long trying to convince you
of the opposite because I've only known
I was wrong for about 30 seconds and I'm
always only operating with the
information that I have at the time but
in that moment the other person was
interpreting the hindsight bias to my
actions they weren't seeing it as I
genuinely saw something one way for a
period of Time new information changed
my mind and now I see it a different way
they were interpreting this as me
finally admitting that they were right
when I had known it all along which was
of course not the case and we eventually
got clear on that and laughed about it
and let it go but this type of thing
plays out interpersonally and intra
personally all of the time we realize
we're wrong or we admit we're wrong and
the other person or us automatically
goes you knew that all along because you
had X Y and Z pieces of data that you're
now acknowledging fit this side of
things more so than this side of things
and everybody involved can quickly
forget that at the time we were
interpreting that same data in different
way because we had different pieces of
information around it that made it look
different and we have to give ourselves
the grace of recognizing that and not
gaslighting ourselves into pretending
that we knew things we couldn't possibly
have known at a different point in time
and we're secretly behaving maliciously
if that is not true even if we're
recognizing that we were operating from
a bias that caused us to interpret the
data in a way that was not favorable to
another person or whatever it is that is
also part of Being Human it does not
mean we are trash garbage people who
don't deserve to have close relationship
or whatever other story we're telling
ourselves about what it means to have
gotten something wrong and once we can
truly accept that we can move on to step
four which is integrate your wrongness
so figure out what led to you
misinterpreting this data which biases
were at play which information were you
missing what caused you to be wrong
about this thing either in terms of
literal facts that you've gotten wrong
or in terms of the structure around how
you were interpreting the facts that led
you to an incorrect conclusion so I also
want to bring this more into the human
realm and look at it through the lens of
let's say you thought you were doing
something that was the right thing to do
then you did it and maybe someone who
you were close with goes hey that thing
really hurt me and now you realize ooh
that was not the most effective thing I
could have done for maintaining this
relationship or let's say you do
something that you kind of know in the
back of your mind the other person might
not like but you do it anyways at this
step your job is to figure out why you
did that thing what need were you trying
to fulfill that led you to behaving in a
way or drawing some sort of conclusion
that you now in retrospect think is
wrong and the important part here is
that you have to actually think you're
wrong for this part to work it can't be
a fun response so if you do something
you know it's a little bit selfish but
you're like oh I kind of want to do it
and I just hope my partner isn't going
to get mad and then your partner gets
mad and you go oh my God I'm so sorry I
was wrong you're not really integrating
what happened there and so your apology
is probably going to be meaningless
because if the part of you that behaved
in a way you're deeming to be selfish
was actually a deep need that's been
going unmet for you for a long period of
time that finally hit the override
button on the rest of your moral code
it's highly likely that that is going to
happen again if you don't spend the time
figuring out what caused you to hit that
override button and how you can avoid it
happening again in the future my
personal very Firm Stance on apologizing
is that it's kind of useless to do it
unless and until you are very clear on
why you behaved the way you did as well
as how you can be certain you will not
behave that way again in the future
using a means other than willpower to
contest that behavior you have to
actually get down to the root of what
was driving it and find a way to fulfill
the need that was going unfulfilled that
caused you to take the action that you
now see is morally wrong and that is
when you know you have integrated that
shadow element of yourself deeply enough
that you can trust yourself to not
behave the same way again in the future
if the same need arises if I got
triggered and behaved in a way that was
cruel or insulting towards another
person it's not over as soon as I go to
the other person and go I was triggered
I'm sorry it's over when I've unpacked
that trigger enough to know that when it
becomes active again I will not behave
in the same way so I have an alternate
way of dealing with that trigger in the
future that's what it means to truly
integrate the areas in which we have
made a mistake or gotten something wrong
we figure out the true sequence of
events not the idealized sequence of
events the actual nitty-gritty
uncomfortable
ugly things that led to something
happening that we believe is wrong and
we learn how to welcome those ugly
things into our awareness for long
enough to listen to what they need from
us and learn to fulfill those needs in a
healthier way and and if what we are
wrong about is a more logical thing it's
not that dissimilar process we look at
which beliefs or which biases or which
thought patterns that maybe we're not
proud of led us to interpreting the data
in the way that we did and develop some
sort of internal process for catching
ourselves when we might be thinking in
that biased way and then we know that
we're unlikely to make that same type of
error in the future so once we have done
that deep integration work this leads us
to the final point in the process which
is make amends for your wrongness
without sacrificing your dignity so
again this means taking responsibility
only for that which you are responsible
for so it does not mean fawning it does
not mean going I'm trash I'm a terrible
person and buying into whatever other
people or yourself believes being wrong
means it means acknowledging that you've
made a mistake that if it affected other
people it's likely you have remorse over
it and you want to do something to right
you're wrong but also being firm in the
fact that you have reckoned with this
mistake internally you have really spent
time getting familiar with why you made
it and you can offer people a clear
perspective of why you won't make it
again in the same conditions in the
future this is what it means to not just
apologize but to make true amends
apologies are cheap but amends take real
deep self-examination and humility but a
big part of being able to make true
amends is knowing the limits of those
amends so being able to acknowledge the
mistakes we made and the impact that
those mistakes have on other people
without blindly accepting all of these
narratives that try to erase our
Humanity in the process and again this
is easier to do the more honest we are
with ourselves earlier on in the process
if we haven't really taken the time to
consider in which ways we're wrong and
what led to us being wrong we're going
to be more likely to Fawn and accept
whatever stories other people want to
put on us about us being wrong or get so
defensive that the entire issue never
gets dealt with in which case both sides
are going to continuously up the ante
until more and more stories that take
you both away from reality in reality we
all get stuff wrong sometimes it's
important to acknowledge when we're
wrong both to ourselves and to the
people involved but there's nothing
inherently shameful about getting
something wrong in good faith or even a
lot of the times in sketchy Faith right
we all have biases that lead us to
interpret things in ways that are a
little bit more favorable for the
outcome that we want that is part of
Being Human it happens to all of us even
when you are wrong even when you have
messed something up even when you have
hurt other people through that being
wrong you still matter as a human being
you still have worth and you still have
dignity and keeping those things in mind
as counter-intuitive as it might seem
actually makes it a lot easier to
recover from your mistakes and repair
the damage that you have caused the more
we can allow ourselves the opportunity
to not kick ourselves off our own team
when we realize we've done something
wrong the more we start to slowly change
the overall social landscape of how we
as a collective deal with other people
being wrong the personal and Collective
Shadow are always deeply intertwined
which is probably a big part of where
that phrase be the change you want to
see in the world comes from so if you
would like to see a world where humility
is easier to practice and where people
can genuinely put their egos down and
learn from each other with forgiveness
when people get things wrong or make
mistakes it starts with giving yourself
that patience and forgiveness when you
have made a mistake and showing the same
type of Grace to yourself that you would
like to extend to others alright that's
all I have to say for today on the topic
of being wrong while keeping your
dignity intact a big part of why I
wanted to make this video is because as
we Inc counter Shadow content so as we
go through the other days of this week
and we start looking at part of
ourselves we're not happy with or we're
now interpreting through a Different
Light it's important to keep in mind
that we need to be practicing compassion
and respect for ourselves in that
process lest we let our defenses take
over and refuse to integrate information
that could make our lives a lot better
if we were willing to look at it but
that is all I have to say for today on
this topic let me know in the comments
as always what you're thinking feeling
what your questions are I love you guys
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and your inner children
who get a lot of things wrong and I will
see you back here again really soon
thank you
[Music]