hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today I want to talk
about a topic that I think often gets
left out of the attachment slash trauma
healing space which is the role of joy
and happiness and love and vitality and
connection in our lives I think that so
many people like myself go through a
long period when they start taking on
trauma or attachment healing work where
they're only looking at what doesn't
work in their lives so which patterns of
relating of adapting of coping with
life's challenges have become
maladaptive and are now getting you less
of what you want and more of what you
don't want out of your life so on this
channel we talk a lot about how to flip
that equation and get more of what you
do want and less of what you don't want
but in order to do that we have to know
how to stay in touch with not only our
nose so our boundaries limits the things
we don't want in our life but also our
authentic embodied yeses so what we feel
excited about encouraged by drawn
towards and hopeful about and so today I
want to use this video to talk about how
to re-engage with a feeling of love in
your life not for a particular person
not even for yourself but just for your
General Life conditions so how to fall
back in love with your life maybe after
a period of focusing really hard on its
Shadows right which is a lot of what
that healing work is
so there's a quote I really liked that I
read one time online that said that
there's no such thing as forcing
ourselves to fall asleep all we can do
is create the conditions under which
sleep is most likely to spontaneously
occur for us and I very strongly believe
that the same is true for leading a life
that we love there is no way to strong
arm our lives into giving us consistent
happiness but there is a way to set up
our lives in such a way that happiness
and joy and connection and gratitude are
feelings that are likely to
spontaneously emerge and then disappear
for a while and then re-emerge so this
isn't about forcing joy into our lives
at all costs it's about optimizing for
it and giving ourselves the best
possible chance at repeatedly
encountering small scale good things in
our lives which actually might be a
totally new way of experiencing joy and
happiness for a lot of us right when you
start out from a place of insecure
attachment or of trauma there can be
this tendency to kind of cling
desperately to any good feelings that
come your way because you're not sure
when the next time you're going to get
to experience happiness or Joy or Pride
or whatever that positive emotion is is
going to be so there can be this
tendency to kind of cling on to Joy so
tightly that we accidentally crush it
underneath our grasp and this video is
going to be about how to not do that so
how to create a life where we can
appreciate things like connection and
joy and excitement and hope as they
filter through our lives without needing
to hold desperately onto them because we
know that there is eternally more of
where that came from so the process of
falling in love with your life in this
video is going to be akin to the process
of falling asleep I'm not going to tell
you what exactly to do I'm going to tell
you how to create the best possible
environment for happiness and joy and
all of those good things to
spontaneously and continuously emerge
within so tip number one is work on
increasing your luck surface area so
this is another tweet that I read
somewhere that I could not find again
when I went searching for it but it was
specifically about achieving success
however I believe this applies to many
areas of our life so where I found this
concept the most helpful was when I was
trying to re-establish a social network
that I felt really aligned with and I
went okay there is no way for me to go
out and force myself to have like 10 new
friends tomorrow but what I can do is
continuously show up at events or in
environments where my chances of meeting
people I might want to be friends with
who care about similar things to me who
want to develop in similar ways or who
might have new things to teach me that I
find very valuable are maximized so
which groups which topics which
interests should I double down on in
order to maximize my chances of finding
friends and I found that this approach
worked really well not only
interpersonally but in pretty much any
area so if I want Career Success what do
I need to be doing professionally not to
force success to happen but to put
myself in enough of the right situations
where it becomes likely that at some
point it will if I want a romantic
relationship which environments or which
situations can I put myself in where I'm
most likely to meet someone in that way
so whatever it is that you're wanting
more of instead of looking at how do I
force that thing into my existence ask
yourself how can I increase my luck
surface area here which rooms should I
be putting myself in which types of
conversation should I be having what
type of personal development work should
I be doing that's going to increase the
chances of that thing starting to take
shape for me and this approach kind of
necessitates us to play the long game a
little bit right so it's not I want a
community I'm going to go out tomorrow
and have it by the end of the day it's
not I want to have a romantic
relationship that's healthy I'm going to
go out and be in it by the end of this
weekend it's not I want X Y or Z to
happen in my career so I'm going to
figure out how to get it in four months
or less it's how do I slowly and
consistently build myself into the
person who has the kind of life where
cool connections with new people happen
pretty frequently or where the type of
professional opportunities that I'm
interested in naturally Surround Me
based on the network I've built and what
this really helps do is take the
pressure off that thing that we want
right if we're looking at every new
person we meet as please be the answer
to my loneliness or lack of success or
whatever it is that we're struggling
with we're going to be placing way too
much pressure on each individual
interaction but if we kind of look at
this as little seeds that we're planting
all over our life well knowing that
we're gonna need to water those seeds
and attend them over a long period of
time before they become that beautiful
Blooming Garden we're going to be able
to approach everything with the right
level of intensity sometimes less is
more and that can definitely be the case
when we're trying to build from the
ground up a life that is very different
from the one that we've had in the past
we have to learn to tend to it in a
totally different way concept number two
that might help you create the
conditions for the type of life that you
would naturally fall in love with is
switch your mindset from the mindset of
discipline so I have to do X Y or Z or
else I'm not going to get what I want to
a mindset of love and devotion so if I
want something out of my relationship
out of my job out of myself instead of
focusing on staying really disciplined
and really committed to a certain set of
actions if that tends not to work for
you try thinking of it as a labor of
love so if there's something I want out
of my career it's not that I'm forcing
myself to get up early and hustle it's
that I'm choosing to devote myself to
this project or to this way in which I
want to develop that I'm absolutely in
love with if there's something I want to
give back through work through
relationship how do I stay flexible yet
committed to that thing as an act of
ongoing devotion and I found that for
myself flipping it in this way really
takes that kind of critical parent part
of the Mind offline because it's not
about following a plan perfectly and
criticizing ourselves if we fall off
it's about making sure that we are
keeping ourselves healthy and balanced
enough to be able to continue giving
back to the world in an absolutely the
optimal way because we care about what
we're doing and if we care about the
thing that we're doing and we are at the
heart of the thing that we're doing or
want to give back then we by default
have to care about ourselves or else
nothing good is going to flow out of us
so looking at our lives and the things
that we want out of our lives through
the lens of what do I want to devote
myself to gives us a more holistic
framework to operate from I am doing
this even though it's difficult and it's
hard and maybe a hundred percent of me
doesn't want to right now because I care
so much about it and I love it so much
is a drastically different mindset then
you better get it together or else
you're going to be a total failure right
the former allows us to retain a sense
of dignity and agency even when we're
not feeling a hundred percent up to the
task or 100 aligned it reminds us that
there is a why behind the choices that
we make with our lives and that why is
what gives us a deep sense of resilience
when the going gets tough and it all
start starts with that question what do
I love enough to devote myself to and
then how do I take continuous aligned
action in that direction framework
number three for falling in love with
your own life is a little bit
counter-intuitive but I believe it's the
most important part welcome in all of
your feelings including the negative
ones and learn to get down with them
grief anger disgust these emotions are
imperative to our overall psychological
function they wake us up to where our
nose are in life and until we know where
our limits our boundaries and our nose
are we do not know where our yeses are
and we definitely do not trust ourselves
enough to fully engage and embrace those
yeses a lot of us have been conditioned
to believe that negative emotions aren't
that useful that we ought not to feel
them that we ought to do away with them
or find a way to reframe or find the
positive inside of every single
situation but if we are doing that at
the expense events of learning from our
negative feelings we're not developing
proper discernment and without proper
discernment we cannot make wise aligned
choices for ourselves and those wise
aligned choices are imperative to
eventually creating a life for ourselves
that works really well and that allows
for a lot of joy and positivity to
naturally emerge so welcoming in our
negative emotions and viewing them as
teachers is an incredibly important
practice and it is a practice that will
never end if you learn to do this well
you will be feeling and experiencing
anger and grief and fear and disgust
over and over and over again over the
course of your life and what those
emotions will allow you to do is
continuously refine what works and what
doesn't work for you in your life so
there's this Buddhist system that I
remember reading about one time called
the five wisdom energies where they talk
about these different kind of
expressions of our life force that come
out in Us in different ways and what was
really important and notable about this
system was that in the middle of all of
these different energies we could have
so the energy of knowledge and
understanding the energy of sensual
pleasure right all of these different
parts of life that made up the outer
edges of this kind of wheel in the
middle was what they called Buddha
energy so just this energy of
spaciousness and kind of emptiness that
we had to learn to continuously return
to because that energy is what all of
the other energies emerged from and so
in my own life when I'm experiencing a
lot of difficulty a lot of pain a lot of
anger whatever feeling it is that I
really want to resist and avoid and not
feel I have to ask myself how can I move
through this thing how can I accept it
welcome it sit inside of it even if I
really don't wanna for long enough to
eventually move through it and return to
that Buddha energy that place where all
of these other good things in in life
can spontaneously emerge from because
the more I'm resisting the bad stuff the
more I'm just keeping myself stuck
behind it but when I can however
reluctantly welcome it in except that
whatever this thing I don't want to feel
is is here it's with me it's happening
and I can't escape it then usually it
tells me something really important it
teaches me some sort of lesson that I
need to know then it sets me free to let
go of whatever wasn't working and once
again open up my life to a place where
something new and unexpected and often
very surprising that I didn't know I
needed can naturally emerge from so very
unfortunately hate to inform us all but
if we want to fall in love with our
lives we have to get comfortable staying
present with the parts of it that we
don't like and assuming that they have
something important to teach us just
like joy and excitement and hope and
connection and all of those more
positive feelings also have something to
teach yes condition number four that is
going to help us set the stage for a
life that we can fall in love with is
learning to practice humility sometimes
when we are feeling super Down super
depressed super disconnected from the
world and other people the problem is
that we've actually been focusing too
much on ourselves and unconsciously
telling ourselves the story that we have
all the answers when in actuality we
don't there is a quote that I really
love from Henry Miller that I try to
keep in my awareness anytime I find
myself kind of slipping into that
depressive state where I feel like I'm
Naval gazing a bit rather than doing
authentic self work and it goes develop
an interest in life as you see it the
people things literature music the world
is so rich simply throbbing with Rich
Treasures beautiful souls and
interesting people forget yourself and
there have been periods of my life where
I have literally written this quote down
and hung it up on the wall next to my
bed and looked at it every single
morning to remind myself that I do not
have all of the answers I need and if I
start assuming that I do what I'm likely
to do is just drive myself deeper and
deeper into a state of depression
looking for something that I can only
find outside of me and so developing
humility and believing that other people
and the world around you might have the
answers that you're looking for requires
developing a little bit of trust in
something outside of ourselves and
that's something that can be really
difficult to do if you have a background
of trauma or insecure attachment or
whatever it is but this can absolutely
be the thing that saves Us in periods
where we just don't have the answers we
need or during periods where the answers
that we need are just not inside of us
sometimes we just need some oxygen some
fresh blood some New Perspectives and if
we are absolutely exhausted of ourselves
it can be really nice to just throw
ourselves into the ocean of the world
outside of us and see what cool things
are happening out there what's been
going on well we've been lying inside
and instead of fixating on how we want
to be seen received or what we want to
give back sometimes it's nice to just go
right now I'm going to learn I'm going
to take from the world I'm going to
assume that every single person I meet
and every single situation I put myself
in has something really valuable that I
could learn from or has something that I
could absolutely love and enjoy even in
some small capacity I'm going to assume
that and I'm going to go into every
situation looking for it and this in and
of itself making that assumption that
there's some sort of treasure in any
situation or any interaction we go into
can make a humongous difference when it
comes to the joy that we find in our
day-to-day lives which naturally bleeds
into the next perspective that I like to
employ when I'm looking to increase the
joy and love in my life which is create
a deliberate container for gratitude so
I want to be clear here I don't think
that being happy is always the most
important thing in life I think there
are long periods where focusing on other
things are the most important thing
however there are times where
deliberately sourcing joy happiness hope
motivation to keep going is what's most
important and when I recognize that I'm
in a period like that there's a thought
experiment I like to do based on the
song happy baby by Shea which is a song
that came out I think in like the early
2000s or 90s but one of the lyrics goes
if this is it for me baby that's just
fine I'm not looking anymore for what
will make me happy and the first time
that I heard this song I don't know why
but I took it as kind of a challenge
like I went what if I looked at my life
from that perspective from the
perspective of what if nothing were ever
going to change and my life the way that
I wake up right now inside of it we're
going to be the exact same day after day
after day for the rest of my life and I
didn't have all of these big dreams and
hopes and plans about how I could change
things to look forward to what would I
find to love within the life that I have
which relationships would I want to
deepen which books that are already on
my bookshelf would I stop and take the
time to read what kind of simple Joys
and Pleasures could I find inside of
this life that I already have today that
I naturally dissociate from on a daily
basis because I'm busy thinking about
what I want out of the future and to
this day I still use this thought
experiment every time I'm going through
a period where what I need is a little
bit of extra joy and appreciation and
gratitude in my life I call this my
gratitude container so it's kind of like
hitting pause on my life for a moment
and being really deliberate for a period
of time about just noticing every single
thing that I normally take for granted
or that I normally don't capitalize on
and this experiment has not once ever
failed me anytime I'm really in need on
a soul level of something to be grateful
for something to really lift my spirits
pausing my thoughts about the future and
taking usually three to six months to
just be super present when with and
appreciative of what I have in my life
today every single day when I wake up
almost always allows for some sort of
really profound shift to internally take
place all right second to last strategy
that we're going to talk about today for
creating a life that you're in love with
is the strategy of Simply stepping into
yourself and the person you actually are
so the person who actually likes the
things you like wants the things you
want speaks and behaves in the way that
you speak and behave inside of your own
mind when you're alone with yourself
giving yourself permission to be that
person as much as humanly possible in
the world and letting your life auto
correct around that obviously there are
small ways we need to edit and refine
our own behavior in order to be
respectful of other people but beyond
that a lot of us particularly those of
us who have early attachment wounding or
early trauma tend to spend a lot of time
acting like we're not ourselves and
behaving the way that we think other
people want us to behave wave rather
than the ways that are authentic to us
and what I'm going to suggest here is
that if you're looking to build the
foundation of a life that you're going
to stay consistently in love with you
have to be willing to accept the gift of
getting rejected by the people in
situations that are wrong for you and
the only way you're going to give
yourself that gift consistently is if
you consistently show up as the person
you actually are and this takes a lot of
emotional strength right because you
have to be willing to accept that the
person you actually are is not going to
jive with everyone not everyone's going
to like that person but over time you're
going to very efficiently weed out all
of the people places and things that are
not right for you and you're going to
consistently do that you're not going to
have to spend your life agonizing over
is this right or wrong for me right if
you are being the person you actually
are and interacting with other people
with your true thoughts feelings
emotions at the Forefront it's going to
be a parent in every moment what is and
isn't naturally working so what this
step is is largely a time saving tool
instead of bending and contorting
yourself to fit in subtle ways into all
of these scenarios that you don't
actually fit what if you're just allowed
there to be a little bit more
awkwardness in your life a little bit
more pain and stings from Tiny
rejections that happen in the situations
that are not right for you because what
you're doing when you're doing that is
also creating way more opportunity for
the situations and the people and the
life that you actually want to be drawn
to you and to stick and again this is an
inherently vulnerable act it guarantees
without a shadow of a doubt that you are
going to get hurt there's not a chance
on Earth that you can live authentically
and avoid pain which brings us to the
last tip or the last strategy that I'm
going to recommend today for living a
life that you can fall back in love with
naturally which is you have to accept
that living this way is inherently and
consistently vulnerable there is no way
to love anything on this Earth without
being vulnerable if you at this moment
in time love anything or anyone you are
already deeply vulnerable there is
always a chance that you could lose that
thing there is always a chance that
something could go wrong and this
becomes more and more and more true the
more we learn to love our own lives the
more we bring things in and build things
that feel like they are authentic
connections or extensions of ourselves
the more joy we both take in and give
off all of these things everything that
we build that we love about our lives we
are at risk of losing and a lot of it we
will
and if we do not know how to tolerate
the feelings of vulnerability that come
along with that what we're going to
naturally do is shrink our lives back
down and make them really small so that
we don't have to risk losing anything
to have a big life that we really love
means getting comfortable with the
feeling that we will lose a lot of good
things and we will have to learn how to
grieve and let go of those things in
order to return to that space of being
open for new things to emerge within so
if you're looking for a really wonderful
huge exciting expansive life that you
love without having to feel vulnerable
this is just a reminder that there is no
way on Earth for that to happen you
cannot love something without
experiencing vulnerability even if you
don't admit your vulnerability doesn't
matter if you love something it's there
get comfortable winning and get
comfortable losing if you want to have a
life that you consistently and
pervasively can say that you love
alright that's all I'm going to say for
today on the topic of falling back in
love with your life but as always let me
know in the comments what you're
thinking feeling experiencing what's
coming up for you as you watch this
video as as always I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and I will see you back
here again soon
[Music]