hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if you're new
here today on this channel I want to
talk about the term inner child so if
you've watched at least a couple of my
videos there's a very high chance that
you've already heard me use this term
but I've never made a whole video where
I just break down what I mean when I say
inner child as well as how I personally
like to work with the concept of an
inner child and how I apply it to my own
healing work Shadow work whatever it is
that I'm trying to access internally so
the term inner child means a lot of
different things depending at what
modality or what field you're looking at
internal family systems has one
definition of an inner child
transactional analysis has another
definition I personally first came
across the term when I was reading John
Bradshaw books so he has a book called
homecoming that is all about using
visualization techniques to help you
integrate your inner child
but the way that I use this term is not
necessarily identical to any of those
modalities what a lot of those different
modalities look at as the inner child is
the parts of ourselves that have become
arrested in their development so parts
of ourselves that didn't kind of grow up
chronologically at the same speed that
the rest of us did because some form of
trauma or early wounding kept parts of
ourselves stuck in our emotional or
intellectual development so a lot of the
time when you hear people in the
psychology space talking about an inner
child that's what they're referencing
the parts of ourselves that are kind of
young and naive relative to the rest of
us or the parts of ourselves that are
stuck around some form of trauma now all
of those are great ways to use the term
inner child but I found that for myself
there was another way I found to use
this term that became very helpful
particularly when doing Shadow work so I
like to use the idea of an inner child
the idea of a kind of younger version
that lives inside of me as a way to
bypass the the parts of my brain that
try to explain away my feelings so for
myself and I imagine this is definitely
not unique to me there are a lot of
parts of my brain that try to kind of
Reason away the idea that I might be
feeling something so I'll have let's say
a bit of anger come online and some part
of my brain will go oh no no you must
not feel angry about that because I can
understand why that's happening and if I
can understand it it must mean that I'm
not actually angry and then my body's
feeling one thing but my mind is telling
me another thing so now I have internal
incongruence and I have to do something
kind of weird with that anger in order
to get it to go away from my conscious
awareness but chances are I never
actually process it and so it shows up
at another point in time and it maybe
causes more trouble when it does show up
because now it's one step removed from
the actual situation it originated from
another way we can deny or distort our
emotional experience is refusing to
acknowledge when we are hurt or in pain
and this is often something particularly
if you're on the avoidant side of the
attachment spectrum that your brain
might do without even consciously
Consulting you so someone might do
something that hurts your feelings and
consciously your brain is automatically
going to come online and go that doesn't
hurt my feelings I just think that this
person is emotionally immature they
can't control their own emotions this
has nothing to do with me Ergo my
feelings are not hurt so the way that I
like to think about an inner child is I
like to visually represent this kind of
kid who lives inside of me who still
feels hurt and pain and anger and all of
these very raw emotions even in the
situations where my adult brain thinks
that it knows better so picturing a
little child living inside of me allows
myself to give myself permission to feel
things that my cognitive brain would
otherwise try to rationalize away so to
recap I think of the inner child as the
part of the self that is emotional
vulnerable and not particularly
responsive to reason the inner child is
going to feel whatever they're going to
feel no matter how hard you try to
convince them they don't need to feel
that and the inner child is also the
birthplace of our creativity so the
parts of ourselves that feel really
enthusiastic and energetic and curious
and open-minded about being alive are
all qualities that are generally a sign
of a healthy inner child which once
again just means an integrated person
who allows the full spectrum of their
emotions to exist now the last quality
of the inner child that I'm going to
talk about in the introduction here is
that they are vulnerable and in need of
protection so inner children are very
trusting they're very impressionable and
some part of them is kind of taking
everything in as true even if our adult
brains are telling them that something
is false so if someone says something
really mean or unkind to me in my adult
mind I might go I know that thing's not
true but it's still going to reach and
hurt my inner child even if I know
rationally that that is not the case so
when we start thinking about inner
children we also need to start thinking
about how to protect those parts of
ourselves as well as how to push them
towards growth and both are important in
different scenarios so if our inner
children are the kind of raw impulsive
emotional parts of ourselves we also all
have an inner parent so an inner parent
is the part of myself I like to think of
as being responsible for protecting my
inner child whereas the inner child
wants to run and explore and find out
all of the time the inner parent is the
part of myself that knows about what's
important and needs to be prioritized
even if it's not fun in order to keep
myself safe and emotionally secure long
term so the inner parent is this
practical disciplined and future
oriented part of ourselves that knows
how to do things like delay
gratification set meaningful goals and
discern when it's time to indulge in an
inner child's emotion versus when it's
time to push them a little bit so our
inner parent is a part of ourselves that
is very focused on self-preservation so
making sure that we stay safe and stable
in the world and most people tend to err
on one side or the other when it comes
to which part of their internal
experience they listen to more sometimes
people will have their inner child
running the entire show so you'll have
this kind of emotional impulsive version
of yourself making all of the decisions
with very little foresight about how
that's going to play out down the line
and if that's the case it's likely that
the development work you need to do is
actually more around your inner parent
than your inner child maybe you have
some wounding around the idea that a
parent could be nurturing and caring as
well as disciplined and so you're trying
to just run away from the entire
parenting process not realizing that
there's a way to be loving and healthy
in that parenting process
and on the other side of things we have
people who do a lot of inner parenting
but they kind of stifle the inner child
in the process so not giving enough
value to things like joy and excitement
and curiosity and creativity and instead
doubling down on only what makes
practical sense which can often lead to
feeling kind of depressed and dead
inside depression burnout anxiety are
very frequently signs of a neglected
inner child so again for some of us the
qualities that are more inherent to that
inner child are what we find in our
shadow if growing up it was not adaptive
for us to be explorative and emotional
and creative and playful those might be
the parts of ourselves that we now need
to learn to allow ourselves access to or
if when we were growing up it was
actually very adaptive for us to be
vulnerable to a fault and to not develop
the skills of discipline or
self-regulation those are going to be
the traits that you find in your Shadow
and that you need to start making
conscious for yourself in order to step
into a more adult role in your life so
with that kind of introduction and once
again this is mostly just how I look at
the term inner child and inner parent it
is not the way to look at it and there
are a lot of different people who look
at it slightly differently I'm going to
go over five ways that I like to work
with my own inner child inner parent
dynamic in order to help me kind of
bypass the critical filters that
normally Shield me from seeing what's in
my shadow and make that shadow content
more conscious so that I can start to
integrate it so the first way I
recommend working with your inner child
is to improve your relationship with
self-protection the question that I like
to frequently ask myself in the presence
of other people is if I had a literal
five-year-old child so five-year-old is
pretty emotional pretty vulnerable and
pretty susceptible to believing whatever
they're told what I feel comfortable
leaving my five-year-old child in the
temporary care of this person and this
person could be a new romantic interest
it could be a friend it could be a
family member but this question would I
become handing over a five-year-old to
this person and trusting that they're
going to be able to take reasonably good
care of them and that they're not going
to abuse them in any significant way or
make them feel unnecessarily bad about
themselves I use that as a barometer for
whether or not it's safe for me to be
vulnerable with a given person because
there is a part of me whether I like it
or not that is five years old and that
will feel hurt if I'm insulted or will
feel confused and distressed if I'm
vulnerable in the presence of someone
who is completely non-regulated
themselves
and so what this doesn't mean is that if
the answer is no I wouldn't leave a
five-year-old child alone with this
person we have to cut them out of our
Lives entirely what it means is that
that might just not be the right person
or the right time for us to let our
guards down around somebody when we are
vulnerable when we are allowing
ourselves to be kind of raw and messy in
front of another person it is like we
are letting the five-year-old inside of
us directly interact with another person
so we need to be reasonably sure that
that other person is able to do things
like handle delicate topics with
maturity and respect to us when they
come up so if I'm ever in a situation
where someone is speaking to me in a way
that is very rude or disrespectful what
I try to ask myself is would I be
comfortable with someone speaking to my
five-year-old child this way and if the
answer is no what would I say to that
person to let them know it's not okay to
speak to my child that way because if I
had a literal child I would see it as
very important to stand up for them and
for them to to know that I care about
them and I'm not going to let other
people speak rudely to them so if
there's ever a situation where someone
is speaking to me in a disrespectful or
rude way and I think ooh I would not let
them speak to my child that way I know
that I now have the responsibility as my
inner parent to stand up for myself
towards that person or else I'm going to
lose the respect of my inner child and
I'm going to lose my own self-trust I
need to prove to myself that I matter
and that I deserve respect the same way
I would want to prove that to a
five-year-old child and so this is kind
of the first area I like to look at when
I'm thinking about doing inner child
work if I have trouble accessing and
giving credit to my own vulnerability I
try to think of the part of myself that
is small and vulnerable and
impressionable as a literal child that I
am responsible for protecting and it
gets a lot easier to figure out what
type of boundaries I need to have in
place when I can think of myself in that
way the second place that the inner
child inner parent Dynamic comes is in
really handy is when we're examining our
relationship with growth and
self-development so again most of us
fall a little bit more on one side of
the spectrum we either tend to let our
feelings and our inner child run too
much of the show or we push ourselves
too hard and don't listen to our
feelings of pain and burnout when they
come up and so this can be another
helpful question to ask the self if
let's say I'm up against a challenge I'm
facing something at work or
interpersonally and the adult part of my
brain feels like I should just power
through but I'm starting to feel really
depressed burnt out whatever it is I can
ask myself the question if I had a child
in this situation and I were trying to
teach the child how to be a healthy
productive person in the world in this
situation would I push them to try a
little bit harder and give it another go
or would I look at that kid and go they
are absolutely exhausted and I think
they need some time to rest before we
get back at this and sometimes just
thinking about it in that kind of
externalized way can help us get a clear
picture of where we're at there are
absolutely in life times when we need to
push ourselves to grow past our comfort
zones there are very important types of
struggle and Challenge and pain that we
all need to be able to coach ourselves
through in order to get to the places we
want to get to in life but there's also
a point where pushing ourselves hits a
kind of point of diminishing returns
where our inner children are going to
start throwing Tantrums they're going to
start doing bad work they're going to
zap our ability to be creative and so we
need to be looking at what the right
balance is if you err on the side of
ignoring your feelings when you start to
get uncomfortable or distressed doing
this kind of visualization can help you
recognize that actually tending to that
inner child giving them rest giving them
Comfort giving them support giving them
either alone time or time with others if
that's what they need is ironically
going to be the thing that makes you
more productive in the long run because
inner children have Boundless Energy
when we treat them right they're able to
accomplish a lot more than adults are
able to accomplish in a shorter period
of time so when we can recognize those
moments when they're getting burnt out
and give them what they need to feel
replenished again we're ironically
making ourselves more productive and
successful in the long run and on the
other side of things you might have a
sense in your life of having just given
up like you don't care you don't want to
try for things Everything feels
pointless and when we're lacking a deep
sense of self-love it can be easy to
just feel perpetually like we don't care
if we fail but a lot of us would care if
our children failed if they never
developed the skills that they needed to
persevere and get what they wanted out
of life and so thinking of ourselves in
that way once again as a child that we
are responsible for raising with the
values of kindness and empathy and
self-compassion but also the values of
discipline and self-esteem suddenly
pushing ourselves starts to feel like a
greater Act of self-love good parents
know when it's not time to give in to
their inner child and they know when
it's time to support and encourage them
to tackle a challenge rather than giving
up on it prematurely the third way I
recommend working with the inner child
interparent Dynamic is to address your
relationship with your body so a
question that I found it increasingly
useful to ask myself in my adult life is
if I had a child who I fed groomed and
dressed the way that I feed groom and
dress myself what message would I be
sending to that child about their
importance and self-respect so if I'm
neglecting my body that child might feel
frumpy and unimportant but on the flip
side if I'm over fixated on appearance
my inner child might be learning that
nothing about me matters but my looks
and of course like most things there is
a happy medium right in the middle where
we treat our bodies with respect but
also leniency and when we're able to
strike that happy medium we're telling
our inner children that they deserve to
feel nourished and valuable and that
they deserve to take a certain degree of
pride in the way that they present
themselves to the world and why
shouldn't they there's absolutely
nothing Noble about having a terrible
self-image no matter what our body looks
like no matter how much of a symmetrical
face we were or we're not born with all
of us have the opportunity to treat our
bodies with care and respect to give
them healthy nourishing foods to dress
ourselves in a way that actually
showcases our unique personalities and
to take some pride in the way that we
show up in the world that doesn't mean
that it needs to be the whole of our
personality but we do need to teach our
inner children show up in the world in a
way that sends the message to other
people hey I respect myself I treat
myself well because I think I'm
deserving of that fourth way I recommend
working with the inner child inner
parent Dynamic is to improve your
relationship with self-regulation so
again a lot of the time I see inner
child work being approached from the
angle of go fly a kite or eat a Popsicle
or do something that a seven-year-old
would like but you know what else
seven-year-olds like that they're never
going to tell you in their own words but
that they deeply intrinsically need in
order to feel safe in the world they
need discipline they need to know that
there is a responsible adult watching
out for them who will take care of their
needs which sometimes means telling them
that they can't do things they want to
do so a question I find useful to ask
myself to work with my inner child
interparent Dynamic is when I am feeling
fussy impulsive out of control in some
way what might a child need in those
circumstances what might help kind of
settle their nervous system and get them
back to a place of Regulation and very
often the answer is that I need more
structure a big part of emotional
regulation is being able to kind of
relax into that which is predictable in
our lives so if we are just following
every feeling as it comes up we're
actually denying ourselves the
opportunity to feel calm and relaxed on
the whole because we're just kind of
elusively chasing some sort of positive
feeling but when we know that no matter
what there are things I'm going to do
for myself that I might not love in the
moment but that will bring me closer to
the kind of life I want to have and the
kind of consistent emotional regulation
that I need then the times when we're
feeling kind of fussy or emotionally bad
don't feel as scary because we know that
we've created a life for ourselves where
to some degree we're able to regulate
our own emotional experiences so those
deeper feelings are safer for us to
access in the first place once again
sometimes what we need is more play and
more joy and more excitement but other
times what we need is more discipline
and self-trust and it's our inner
parents job to assess when it's time for
what feeling kind of dead inside maybe
time to let the inner child out to play
more but if you're feeling kind of
emotionally out of control that might be
the time for the inner parent to step in
and give you more structure and
discipline in your life so that your
inner child has the predictability they
need in their lives in order to feel
safe and relax and the last way I
recommend you start working with your
inner child which is kind of the direct
inverse of what we just talked about is
to improve your connection to your life
force energy so the part of yourself
that is enthusiastic that is curious
that wants to understand and interact
with the world in a dynamic
ever-changing way all of that energy
comes out of your inner child so if
you're feeling creatively drained if
you're feeling burnt out if you're
feeling overwhelmed very often those are
signs that your inner child hasn't been
prioritized enough that you haven't been
giving them enough time and space and
permission to be playful and curious and
unencumbered by adult responsibilities
so again we're always going to be trying
to find that balance between figuring
out which parts of our lives do need to
be controlled and kind of tightly
monitored in order to give ourselves
enough safety and how spontaneous and
curious and adventurous we're allowing
ourselves to be because those are the
traits that end up pushing our lives
forward
but at the end of the day all of this is
about striking a balance between those
two things just like parents and
children need to work together in order
to figure out what is going to help the
child grow up in a healthy way the more
rational and the more impulsive or
emotional parts of us also need to work
together to figure out how to stay both
engaged with our lives and excited about
them and responsible and capable of
taking care of ourselves so what this
turns into is a dialogue between these
parts of ourselves That Never Ends one
week our inner parent might really need
to take the reins and then the next week
it might be time for our inner child to
come out and play some more this is
going to fluctuate constantly based on
the conditions of our lives and what's
important for us at any given point in
time but in kind of plain language all
this is about is balancing our short
term and our long-term wants and needs
the inner parent is looking out for us
in the long term the inner child is
telling us what's going to make us feel
vital and engaged and invested in our
lives in the short term and both of
those parts of ourselves are Inc
incredibly important to listen to and to
take seriously sometimes taking our
inner child seriously means allowing
ourselves to not take things so
seriously for a period of time because
very often that in and of itself is the
precise medicine we need
all right I'm gonna leave it at that for
today as always let me know in the
comments what you guys are thinking
feeling what's coming up for you as you
go through this I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and your inner children and I
will see you back here again soon
[Music]