What happens when we start doing this
and we start outsourcing our need for
love and worthiness and validation is we
are telling the child that lives inside
of ourselves. There are things about you
that are wrong and bad and shameful and
I'm going to hide you away so that other
people will accept me. And imagine if
you were telling your four-year-old
child that. Imagine what that child
would grow up to believe about
themselves. Imagine the ways they would
learn to interact with other people.
Imagine the ways they would show up in
intimate relationships, right? It would
be a train wreck. And it is a train
wreck when we make these rules for
ourselves. We shove aside the parts of
our inner children that we think are
embarrassing or are not good enough or
are not in line with this image of who
the adult part of ourselves wants to see
ourselves as. We are giving ourselves
the message that there is something
deeply flawed and broken and wrong with
us. And the only antidote to that
message is to start believing something
different from the inside. No amount of
external praise, validation, acceptance,
approval is ever going to be enough to
fix the wounds that we are inflicting on
our inner child when we hide them from
the world. Okay, this is important. So,
I'm going to say it again. Nothing we
can ever get from the external world
will ever ever be enough to fix the
wound we inflict upon ourselves when we
reject our inner Children.