hey guys heidi preeb here i have not
made an enfp video in a while so i
wanted to get back to my roots and talk
about our personality type if you don't
know me or if you are new to this
channel my name is heidi preeb i am the
author of the enfp survival guide and i
am also the creator of the enfp soul
bootcamp course where we talk about how
to optimize your energy as an enfp and
stop trying to live as someone you are
not and that is something that we're
going to talk a lot about today because
i wanted to make a video kind of
outlining a lot of the mistakes that
i've made in my life that hopefully will
save you from making a couple of these
in your own although i do know enfps and
i know that we will absolutely learn
nothing until we have gone through the
experience of having messed it up in the
first place and so no disrespect if that
is how you end up taking this video as
well
anyways without focusing too much on
that let's just get into it number one
way you can accidentally ruin your life
as an enfp and i'm actually not
exaggerating with this one like this is
the number one way i think you could
possibly degrade your entire experience
of your time on earth if you make this
mistake over the course of an entire
lifetime and it is decide that your
insights are valueless so i think that a
lot of enfps luckily not all of us but
many many many enfps grew up thinking
that in order to give back to or
contribute to the world they had to
suppress their natural tendency towards
contemplation towards insight gathering
towards exploration and then kind of
finding those kernels of wisdom within
that exploration and sharing them with
the world and instead had to focus on
being logical and practical and business
oriented and doing all of these things
that you see working for other people
but that aren't necessarily the things
that make you feel the most you and when
i see that happening with an enfp or
with any type but this is our particular
expression of it it just makes me
incredibly sad because i think that not
only are you denying yourself the full
depth of life that you could be
experiencing when you're doing this but
you're also denying the world of this
very unique talent and gift that you
have which is the ability to analyze and
see things through a very unconventional
but beautiful and inspiring lens and the
ability to communicate and inspire
people through those insights so if you
start out from the gate deciding that
the way your mind works and the way that
you prefer to operate in the world is
useless you are denying and robbing both
yourself and the world of a very
important experience of consciousness
that is happening through you right not
to get too spiritual on you guys but i
do believe that i believe that the
consciousness that is getting filtered
through your mind as an enfp has
something very special and unique to
contribute to the world and i don't want
you to hide that i don't want you to
hold that back i need it the world needs
it if you are telling yourself nobody
wants to hear what i have to say i can
automatically say that's not true
because if you are watching this and you
are thinking that i guarantee you i
would care about some of those things
you have to say okay so there's one
person out there who would and i would
also bet a very significant amount of
time energy and money that i am far far
from the only one so number one way to
accidentally ruin your life as an enfp
is decide that your insights are
valueless number two way to accidentally
ruin your own life as an enfp is to
limit the way that you seek out
education so i think that a lot of enfps
tend to struggle with the traditional
education system i know that
particularly in my undergrad days i
really struggled with my degree i really
struggled with how kind of limited and
uncreative i had to be in order to get
the marks that i wanted to get now that
i'm in my masters i am enjoying it a lot
more because it's a much more flexible
approach to learning but when we think
of the word learning i think that for
most of us that's what comes to mind
right is just traditional education but
for enfps and any any valuing types
that's enfps infps entps and intps where
you're going to learn the most and the
most quickly and the most impactfully is
through direct experience so getting out
there in the world and actually seeing
things from different angles having
different experiences
noticing yourself moving through all of
these different experiences and what
arises for you in the process that is
your natural learning style as an enfp
and if you are denying yourself the
opportunity to learn that way you're
denying yourself an incredible amount of
wisdom that you could gain over the
years through engaging the way that you
are born and created to engage with the
world okay so there's nothing wrong with
traditional education there's nothing
wrong with going to school and going all
the way through and doing your phd and
degrees after that if that's what lights
you on fire but i want you to not
discount how much you can learn outside
of a classroom how much you can learn
from very unconventional modalities how
much you can learn through direct
experience because the way that your
mind works is that you naturally gather
tons of information tons of experiences
tons of perspectives and then you hone
in on which ones you think make the most
sense and which ones help you
internally structure your experience of
reality okay that is how your mind
functions it's how your cognitive
stacking works and if you are limiting
yourself in terms of experiences and
adventures and perspectives you are
actually taking away from your ability
to learn rather than adding to it okay
so anytime i hear an enfp talking about
being burnt out or exhausted or whatever
it is i often see that it's because they
are following too linear of a path
rather than allowing their mind to do
what it naturally wants to do which is
go create explore and discover and there
is an absolute art to knowing when it is
time for you to do that versus when it's
time for you to focus which i think i
have another video on that i will link
in the description of this video but in
the meantime i just want you to keep in
mind that if you are thinking of
education as something you can only get
in a classroom you are absolutely
missing the mark based on the
personality type that you have and again
don't rob the rest of us of those
incredibly valuable insights you would
probably gain if you were allowing
yourself to explore the world in as free
a manner as you are naturally inclined
to way number three can accidentally
ruin your life as an enfp is stay in
situations where you really want to
leave so enfps have this tendency to get
very stuck on our routines because we
have inferior si by the way if you don't
know what i mean when i say inferior s i
i'm talking about the enfp's cognitive
functions i do run a six-week enfp soul
bootcamp course where i play out these
cognitive functions as little characters
inside of your head that help you
understand how you're thinking about
things making decisions processing your
emotions and all that fun stuff so the
link to that will also be in the
description of this video but in the
meantime i just wanted to talk about
what happens when we let introverted
sense and get too much of a hold on our
experiences and what happens in that
case is that we become petrified to
leave what we know and this is kind of
this paradox that most people don't
intuitively understand about enfps
because on the surface we seem so
free-flowing and fun-loving and like we
are always open to new opportunities but
it's very easy for us to become
emotionally attached to certain
situations or people or patterns that
repeat themselves over the course of our
lives and we can cling to those things
at the expense of going out and
gathering new things to bring into our
awareness and it's important to notice
when we're in that stage when we are
staying somewhere out of comfort out of
familiarity out of fear when what we
really want to do is go be out in the
world exploring and there is an art here
as well to finding that balance between
what keeps us comfortable and safe and
what keeps us energized and kind of
continuously renewed in life right and
that's something that we're going to
have to hone and finesse over the course
of our lives but we don't get to that
healthy middle of the pendulum without
swinging it back and forth a bit so
telling ourselves that because other
people have more staying power than us
we ought to limit ourselves and stay in
situations we don't want to be in
sometimes for years at a time is not
quite the virtue that it can feel like
it is a lot of the time it's just not
allowing ourselves and other people to
move on from a situation that's no
longer working and we have to be willing
to look at it that way because it's the
truth and if you're wondering if this
advice applies to you or not right now
check in with your gut if there was
something in there that went ooh that's
the advice i need it probably applies
whether you're ready to act on it or not
is always a different question way
number four to accidentally ruin your
own life as an enfp is to leave
situations that you actually want to
stay in so as i said this is a pendulum
we talked about one side where you keep
yourself stuck out of fear or out of
self-judgment about what would happen if
you went and explored but the other side
of the pendulum is when you go and
explore at the expense of the parts of
yourself that need safety connection and
comfort right so there has to be a
certain amount of groundedness that you
feel in order to explore in a way that
is meaningful so when we explore from an
untethered place and we're just going
out and collecting experiences and
traveling and exploring and meeting new
people indiscriminately but we never
stop to center those experiences and
figure out what it is that we're seeking
from them in the first place or at least
retrospectively making sense of them
we're going to end up feeling very
aimless like we're kind of floating in
this sea of opportunity where nothing
means that much and nothing feels worth
staying with and persisting through and
life has to be a fine balance of both
right we have to know when it's time to
let go and welcome in something new and
be in a state of uncertainty and when
it's time to decide what matters what
feels meaningful and where we want to
stay whether that means physically
staying somewhere emotionally staying
somewhere intellectually staying
somewhere but whatever we choose to hone
in on and give our energy to
rather than trying to take energy from
it that's the stuff that ends up being
our life's work right and it's not
always time to do our life's work
sometimes it's time to gather
information and explore but again you
kind of know in your gut what those
things are when you find them you just
have to be paying really close attention
to yourself so that you don't miss those
cues when they come up and so you're not
just moving on from things for the sake
of moving on when those are actually
things that could enrich your life in
really meaningful ways way number five
you can ruin your own life as an enfp is
get so attached to any element of your
own identity that you stop approaching
things with beginner's mind so i have an
intj friend who is a teacher at a
private school and he does this thing
with his students that he told me about
one time that i thought was so cool
where he gets his students to fill up a
glass of water right to the brim and
then walk down to the bottom of this
hill without spilling any water out of
the cup and at the bottom of the hill he
asks them how much water's in your cup
and most people are able to do it pretty
well like they can keep most of the
water in their glass and then he asks
them what did you notice on your walk
down the hill what did you notice about
the scenery about the sights about the
sounds about your experience and most of
the students find that they don't notice
that much because they're so focused on
not spilling their water glass that they
aren't really remaining open to the rest
of their experience and this is exactly
what happens when we get so attached to
some element of our ego or the way that
we identify ourselves which is more or
less the same thing that we forget that
there is stuff happening all around us
that could change the way we think of
ourselves that we could change the way
that we identify with ourselves but
whenever we get to a place where we
really want to keep everything that we
have and we really want to hold on
tightly to this idea that we have about
ourselves we just get hyper focused with
not spilling anything out of our ego
right not contradicting any of the
things that we want to believe is true
about ourselves and when we're in that
state we're not approaching life with a
beginner's mind we end up stuck in a rut
because we're so afraid of loss that we
completely forget to be open to changing
our perspective about ourselves and
types that use introverted feeling can
be particularly susceptible to this
because our identities and who we think
we are feels so personal and so
important to us that we will fight tooth
and nail in a lot of cases to avoid
changing and what we don't always do is
check in and ask ourselves does this
still make sense or is there some stuff
in the cup of my ego that could spill
out a little bit and that would probably
be fine and it would give me some room
to walk more freely through life and
gather more experiences i'm gonna see if
i can get that friend to do a video with
me on this channel i think you guys
would like them anyways way number six
you might accidentally ruin your own
life as an enfp is to idealize people at
the expense of actually connecting with
them so this is a mistake i have made
many times in my life and i'm sure i'm
not done making there are certain
mistakes where i'm just like oh i've got
a few more of those left in my system
you know but something that i think most
enfps are familiar with is the
experience of putting someone on a
pedestal in your head and deciding that
they are the answer to all of these
problems in your life that they are the
connection you've been looking for and
then ignoring every piece of evidence
that you gather to the contrary when
you're interacting with that person in
real time and why i think that this is
such a big problem is because when we
are so fixated on who we want someone to
be we completely and totally miss out on
who they are and we cannot have real
relationships with these idealized
people in our heads right we can have
fake relationships with those people and
that can serve as kind of a bomb for
when we're not ready to have real human
connection but i think that a lot of the
time when we idealize people in our
heads we interact with them as though
they're the people we think them to be
inside of our own minds and we don't
allow them the opportunity to be who
they actually are in our presence
because we subtly are always trying to
push them back into that mold and that
is very unfair to other people and it's
also not something that allows us to
build real connection because real
connection happens when we're able to be
mutually vulnerable with people and if
we are not interacting with someone as
they are in real time and responding to
them as they are in real time we are not
holding a space for them to actually
share themselves with us and also we're
not holding a space for ourselves to
share ourselves with the other person
because we're probably just so caught up
in that case on what we want them to
think of us that we've completely lost
out on the very human moments we could
have in the meantime and this is
something once again we talk a lot about
in the enfp soul boot camp is how to
take people off of those pedestals and
interact with them as they actually are
so that we can have better more
meaningful connections with people
instead of hiding in fantasy which is
what we're apt to do but it's a really
hard one and like i said i think that
most of us will struggle with this to
some degree throughout the course of our
lives but the more awareness we can have
around it the more we can keep ourselves
from falling into that trap regularly
and the more opportunity we give
ourselves to actually try to build real
connections which are the things that
end up making our lives feel meaningful
at the end of them right way number
seven you can ruin your life as an enfp
accidentally is by clinging to the past
at the expense of the future so this is
again something that happens to us very
often when we fall into an si grip which
means when introverted sensing tends to
take over our psyche a little bit and it
projects itself into our extroverted
intuition and what happens when we're
doing this is we are trying to force
something that we were happy with or
something that worked really well in the
past into the future even though it no
longer belongs there so maybe that's a
relationship that was once really happy
but is no longer adaptive to the current
circumstances of our lives maybe it's a
job that we loved once but we no longer
feel inspired or fulfilled by whatever
it is there is this tendency we can have
to look at the past and go oh well that
was amazing once therefore i can
recreate that in the future if i just
keep trying and keep trying and keep
trying but what we're actually doing is
trying to force past conditions onto a
future that is no longer compatible with
that thing and i think that when we're
really honest and really quiet with
ourselves we all know when we're doing
this but it doesn't make it any easier
to stop doing it and to force ourselves
to allow our plans for the future to
rearrange which feels scary when we're
used to doing things in one way and when
we have a certain plan for the future
that we've gotten emotionally attached
to which oops i realized i'm talking
about mistake number eight now so let's
just go right into that which is cling
to the future at the expense of the
present so these things are kind of two
sides of the same coin when we want the
future to resemble the past very badly
what we're doing is closing ourselves
off to new future opportunities that
could be available to us if we would
center ourselves in the moment and
realize where we're at now and in order
to do that we have to be willing to let
the plans that we have about the future
and let the fantasy that we have about
the future go not all of the time of
course there's nothing wrong with having
dreams and plans and things we're
excited about for the future but there's
also so many times where we are clinging
to those plans so heavily and clinging
so much to this emotional attachment
that we have to the future that we
cannot see for the life of us what is
actually in front of us and what
situation we are actually in in the
present we are not naturally present
dwelling creatures as enfps extraverted
sensing which is the most present
function is dead last in our cognitive
stacking of eight functions right so
that means we have a lot of trouble
existing in the here and now rather than
our preference for reflecting on the
past or planning the future but if we
can't center ourselves in the moment
intentionally often enough to make sure
that the way we're thinking about both
the past and the future still makes
sense we will get stuck in rut after rut
after rut where we are trying to force
our conceptualization of reality onto a
reality that no longer makes sense so
clinging too much either to the past or
the future is a recipe for disaster for
us way number nine you can accidentally
ruin your own life as an enfp is to deny
your natural energy and your natural
personality preferences and try to
endlessly fit yourself into all of these
boxes that you do not belong in so once
again a lot of enfps deal with a lot of
internalized shame about the ways in
which they are different from the people
around them right we are very creative
we think outside the box we act outside
the box we need to experience experience
experience before we decide what we
think what we feel or what we want to
pursue in life and one of the worst
things you can do for yourself is deny
yourself that exploration and deny
yourself the way that you naturally
function in the energy that you could
genuinely bring to the world because you
think that there's something wrong with
it there is nothing wrong with it that
energy has to be harnessed and it has to
be managed mindfully but you can learn
to do that those are skills you can
acquire you don't have to mimic other
people who are doing things in a
completely different way and tell
yourself that you will never get
anywhere unless you act like someone
you're not
you can act like the person you are but
learn to be a loving parent to that
child inside of yourself who is
eternally wanting to go out and explore
and learn more right you can learn to
set natural boundaries and limits on
your own energy in a way that allows you
to keep it alive and active without
burning out and without trying to mimic
like an estj who just does everything in
a very organized way that is not who you
are it is never who you will be and that
is a good thing because every distinct
personality and every distinct person
brings something very unique to the
world that needs to be there right
so one of the fastest ways to ruin your
life permanently is to go through life
with this idea that you have to be
someone else okay you don't and you
shouldn't you should be you and if
you're not excited that you're you i am
i'm excited that you're you so i will
hold that excitement for you until you
are ready to reclaim it because i always
want every single enfp out there to be
showing up as the most energized and
alert and awake versions of themselves
because i don't think you guys realize
how rare that is and how important it is
to the world way number 10 that you can
accidentally ruin your own life as an
enfp and of course i have to end with
something that is completely
contradictory to everything i've said
before this point which is allow your
personality to limit you in terms of
anything that you want to pursue so yes
go with your natural energy find your
flow cultivate mindful practices that
allow you to understand how you work and
how it best serves you to show up in the
world but if there is something you want
to do or some experience you want to
have and you think that is not so
enfp-friendly
oh my god do not let your personality
type limit you from trying that thing
i've had a kind of reverse experience in
my own life where i went so deep into
creating content and stuff around being
an enfp that i started to think of
myself as only an enfp right and if i
had stuck with that mindset so many
things that i ended up learning in life
that were more entpish or intj-ish or
esfj-ish i would never have learned and
there are so many situations i would
never have put myself in because i would
have assumed that that situation would
not work out for me life in theory is
not the same as life in practice and
theory is this wonderful tool we can use
for self-understanding but it should
never ever ever ever ever ever ever be a
tool that we use to limit ourselves and
limit the experiences that we allow
ourselves to have in the world because
we learn through that experience and we
learn the most through experiences that
go wrong so sometimes it's actually very
useful for us to put ourselves in the
wrong room around the wrong people in
the wrong situation don't intentionally
traumatize yourself but do be willing to
go out on those limbs and put yourself
in situations that you're not sure
whether or not you'll thrive in right if
there's anything we learn through as
enfps it is being in situations where we
have to sink or swim so give yourself
the gift of those situations and don't
let any thoughts you have about yourself
and who you think yourself to be hold
you back from any of that ever back to
point number two you learn best through
the school of life so give yourself as
big and as vast of an education as you
are possibly able to give yourself that
is absolutely what your mind is
naturally wired to do
okay i think that's all i have to say
for today but as always i want to hear
from you guys because in the comments
section usually people are giving each
other much better advice than i'm giving
any of you so let me know which mistakes
you have made as an enfp in your life
that you think could have been avoided
circumnavigated dealt with differently
and we can all learn from each other
because that's what we are ultimately
here to do alright as always i love you
guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again really soon