hey guys heidi prep here welcome to my
channel if you're new welcome back if
you're not
i am making this video today because the
last video that i made was called how to
be sad and the responses to the video
were kind of mixed which i sort of
expected in that a lot of people were
like yeah i really struggle with sitting
with feelings of sadness as well and
allowing those to exist in my body my
psyche
and other people were like okay
uh great but can you teach us how to
stop being sad
and the answer to that is yes that is
actually easier for me
kind of like i think that for most of my
life because i historically have aired a
lot more on the avoidance side of the
attachment spectrum i have struggled to
sit with negative emotions allow myself
to take them seriously and myself the
way i take them seriously and other
people and so it's only really been
recently in my life that i have started
feeling what i believe are situationally
appropriate negative emotions so when
something sad happens i feel sad and
that should not be new for me but it
kind of is so
lately i am going through some personal
that is really hard and i am
feeling sad a lot and i am noticing kind
of interestingly
that the way i take myself out of
sadness and i'm learning to
kind of cope with sadness requires an
integration of both sides right if you
don't know how to be sad you also don't
know how to be happy and vice versa and
that's like the oldest saying in the
book and i am reluctantly learning that
it's true
but i felt like it was an appropriate
time to make this video because i am
currently trying to take myself out of
my own wallowing a little bit so if
that's something you're struggling with
let's move through that together so the
first thing i want to address and this
is how i look at absolutely every area
of mental health is that until we
understand the function of whatever it
is that we want to do away with it's
going to be really hard to do away with
it because when our unconscious minds
are holding on to any particular
experience or thought or emotion they're
usually doing it because they're getting
something out of it so we are getting
something out of it without realizing
what and very often if you are someone
who has a pattern of struggling to let
go of negative emotions as we were
talking about in the last video it tends
to mean that you're likely to be on the
anxious side of the attachment spectrum
so whether that's anxious attachment or
some people who have fearful avoidant
attachment and there's actually a
perfectly logical reason why those on
the anxious side of the attachment
spectrum tend to struggle to let go of
negative feelings and the reason is
because they worked really well for you
at a given point in your life so when we
are very young and we're developing our
emotional system we learn to perpetuate
the emotions that get us what we want
because when we are infants we are
completely and totally geared towards
survival so those on the avoidance side
of the spectrum which we talked about in
the last video learned very young that
they got the most care and attention and
positive feedback out of their
caregivers when they displayed positive
emotion and when they inhibited negative
emotion so maybe their parents rejected
them or showed disgust towards them
anytime they cried or showed need or
vulnerability but as long as they were
acting like everything was good and they
were happy and there was no problems
they would get the care and nurturance
that they needed so they learned that
negative emotions really aren't that
important in getting us what we want so
we don't need to focus much on those and
we definitely don't need to show them
but with the anxious side of the
spectrum sort of the opposite thing
happened so if you're on the anxious
side of the attachment spectrum it's
likely that your parents responded the
most to you when you displayed negative
emotions so when you cried when you
showed need or vulnerability you were
more likely to have your needs met so
from a young age you internalized okay
the more i hang on to negative emotion
and show it to other people the more i'm
going to get my survival needs met and
this kind of conditioning this kind of i
don't love the word programming but i
will use it here because it does kind of
apply sticks with us so when we learn
showing negative emotion gets me what i
need out of life it's a survival
strategy we learn for the rest of our
lives to overvalue negative emotion when
it comes up and the thought of letting
go of that negative emotion might
actually be kind of scary to you on an
unconscious level because you might
deeply believe if i stop being sad if i
stop showing my vulnerability and need
to other people i will be left alone
forever and interestingly this is the
complete inverse of how the avoidant
feels which is that if i do show
vulnerability in need i will be left
alone forever or i will be outcasted in
some way so the first thing to keep in
mind if this is something you really
struggle with is getting stuck in those
negative emotions
is that this almost definitely does have
a survival value for you on an
unconscious level now you might be in a
situation now as an adult where you no
longer need to hold on to that
negativity right where you would not
necessarily be abandoned by your friends
and loved ones if you were to express
happiness and you were to step out of
the negative emotions that you feel so
we're going to talk about how to do that
but before we talk about how to do that
we have to talk about how you are
perpetuating your negative experiences
so
everyone feels sad even those who do not
consciously feel a lot of sadness
experience sadness so the experience of
sadness like any emotion is just a
feeling in the body right so for me
sadness feels very exhausting like i
want to lie down
i want to not do anything i want to not
think i want to not act i want to just
take time to be alone with myself and
almost like like it feels like my body
wants to like sink back into the earth
that's what sadness feels like for me
for other people it's different but
feelings that are pure and when i say
feelings that are pure i mean
physiological reactions to what happens
around us don't last for as long as we
tend to think that they do so there'll
be days especially lately where like i
wake up and i'm like oh it's a sad day
like today is gonna be a bad
day i'm not gonna get much done and
because i'm in a whole phase of my life
where i'm trying really hard to listen
to my emotions i usually go okay how can
i clear my schedule how can i make sure
i don't need to do as much as i would
otherwise have to do today so i can
attend to this sadness and then
sometimes because i'm trying to stay
extremely aware of my emotional state
moment to moment like half an hour later
i'll be in the kitchen and sun will be
shining and like a song will come on
that i like and i'll be like oh in this
moment i want to dance like i want to
move i feel good i don't feel the same
way that i felt an hour ago when i woke
up but
it's really easy as human beings to
perpetuate the story that we have in our
head about how we're feeling and
distrust the actual feelings that are
showing up moment to moment in our
bodies so even let's say a year ago not
having the experience with somatic work
that i now have i would have felt that
moment of oh i kind of like want to
dance and sing like i feel good right
now and i would have gone no i'm having
a sad day i'm gonna go back to my bed
and i'm gonna continue my day of being
sad and i would have brought up this
story that i created inside my own mind
which is that today i am sad i will be
sad all day this thing that is happening
in my life is necessitating sadness
within me and i have to follow that
feeling because i noticed it one time
and now i think that that's the only
feeling i can feel for a while and this
kind of story that we tell ourselves is
often a much greater cause of the
sadness than the actual physical sadness
that lives in our body so the number one
thing we need to start doing if we want
to change our emotional state is be
aware of which actual states we are
feeling moment to moment okay we can
feel three different things over the
course of 10 minutes and we can allow
ourselves to shift and adapt to each of
them but if we are telling ourselves
these stories about our emotions and
staying loyal to those stories even when
our bodies aren't necessarily aligning
with them quite the same way they were
when we first crafted those stories we
are going to perpetuate feelings of
sadness because if i wake up and tell
myself i'm sad today then i start
feeling happy then i go wait wait no
that doesn't make sense i'm going to
re-tell myself the story about why i'm
sad and my body is going to react to
that mental image that i'm feeding it of
this sad terrible tragic thing that's
happening in my life right and now my
body is going to bring that
physiological feeling of sadness back
into it and i'm going to perpetuate my
own negative response pattern so the
first thing to do here is be aware of
the fact that your mind might have been
conditioned to do this automatically so
from a very young age you may have
learned it's adaptive for you to tell
yourself these stories about your own
sadness and to perpetuate them inside of
your mind so that even if your brain
starts feeling kind of good for a minute
your impulse is to return to that story
and go no no no that's wrong i'm not
happy i'm sad and you have to start
practicing catching yourself in those
moments in order to start riding those
waves and sometimes i think that those
who struggle with sadness can actually
need to know that their sadness is not
going away so you can tell yourself oh i
feel good right now maybe i'm having a
sad day but i can dance for 10 minutes i
can laugh with my friend for 10 minutes
i can enjoy scrolling through instagram
for 10 minutes or whatever it is that
makes you happy online it's okay to tell
yourself if i am experiencing something
that i think i need to process i can put
it down and come back to it later my
sadness my grief my pain will still be
there okay it's not like if you abandon
it in one moment it's never coming back
and so sometimes as weird as it sounds
to say that just reminding our bodies
and our nervous systems hey i haven't
forgotten about what you're feeling i'm
just not gonna feel it in this moment
can actually give us kind of a hall pass
to start experiencing at least moments
of happiness moments of joy within even
the greater more depressing periods of
our lives but this kind of brings me to
my next point which is that a lot of the
time when we don't have a lot of
experience
feeling a given emotion we actually have
to practice and kind of create a
template for ourselves to feel that
thing and i know this because i have
been doing it with sadness when i
started working with my current
therapist anytime i showed any sadness
vulnerability like any time i started to
tear up in a session he would stop me
and be like wait we are going to amplify
that feeling actually we're gonna sit
with that down regulated feeling in your
body and we're gonna try to stay with it
and see if we can and if you struggle
with positive feelings you might need to
do the same thing in the opposite
direction and so i like to call this
creating a template for the emotion
because just like our brains have
memories our bodies have memories right
our bodies remember feelings and our
experience of those feelings and they
will slip in and out of feeling things
more regularly depending on what we're
used to feeling so if a feeling is kind
of foreign to our body our bodies are
likely to try to find a way to change
out of that state because they don't
have a somatic template for navigating
through them so earlier i was giving the
example of dancing around my kitchen
right i am not a person who has ever
been particularly comfortable with kind
of the flowier aspects of having a body
like i like running and weight training
and sports that are kind of grounded and
concise and i have never been a person
who has felt particularly free in the
way that i express myself physically and
this past winter when i was going
through a pretty tough time in my
personal life i was living with someone
who really liked to do daily dance
parties and she had this practice of
like in between calls she would just
throw on music and go outside and just
dance completely freely for like five to
ten minutes and she started knocking on
my door and being like heidi i am
forcing you into a dance party because i
know that you are feeling down today and
i
hated it god i hated it like i did it
because i wanted to make friends with
her and i wanted to accommodate what she
found exciting and also like when people
are just trying to be nice to me i think
it's nice to let them be nice to me you
know because it's just nice when people
are thinking of you right so her and i
would have our dance parties and at
first i felt super self-conscious and
then after a little bit i was like
whatever you're not looking at me i'm
not looking at you and we would just
rock out for five to ten minutes and
then stop and then i came home i'm back
in my apartment in toronto now and all
of a sudden i started noticing there are
all of these moments where i want to
dance i want to throw on some music
close my blinds and just let my body do
its thing and process whatever it needs
to process through movement and i would
never have noticed those moments and
taken them seriously if i didn't have a
template for it so if i hadn't had these
memories of dancing around my friend's
apartment with her i would never have
gone oh i recognized the feeling of
wanting to dance right
at different times in my life i've had
to learn to recognize the feeling of i
want to be healthy i grew up super
unhealthy not eating anything that was
good for me and it took me until my
mid-20s to even recognize the feeling of
like oh what my body is actually craving
is vegetables or a hard workout or
whatever it is and i only got to that
place after having had experiences where
let's say i was living in a community
where healthy meals were fed to me or
i'd started a workout regime that i'd
gotten used to somatically my body has
now logged memories of what these
emotional states feel like healthy
energetic strong
lively and vivacious like that feeling
of wanting to dance and move and be in
your body we need to practice these
things weirdly awkwardly and badly first
so that we start building memories of
them and we start to notice the moments
that correspond to those memories it
used to be like sometimes i'd get this
restless energy and i'd be like oh i
guess i need to go for a run or i need
to weight train and that was a way of
getting energy out of my body but what i
actually wanted in those times was
expressive movement and i didn't know it
because i did not have a template for
what it was like to dance at least while
i was sober so the quote that kept
coming to mind was there's this quote
that's attributed to like some anonymous
person in the navy or something like
that that goes under pressure you don't
rise to the occasion you sink to the
level of your training that's why we
train so hard so as silly as it's gonna
sound if you want to start changing the
way that you emotionally show up in the
world you have to literally train
yourself to feel the emotions that you
traditionally have not made a habit out
of feeling because to bring it full
circle it's all about having that
moment-to-moment awareness of what's
happening in your body and being willing
to show up to that and to respond to it
appropriately if you are completely and
totally used to feeling sad your body
has a really good template for sadness
it probably doesn't have as much of a
template as much training in the realm
of happiness and so the goal is not to
squash down your sadness tell it it
shouldn't exist anymore and then only go
feel great forever it's literally just
to be aware moment to moment of which
tiny physiological potentials are
bubbling up in your body okay so in one
moment you might feel suddenly
overwhelmed and like you really want to
cry and the potential for sadness is
inviting itself into your body and it
can be a great thing in those moments to
follow that sensation through to cry to
let it out to let your body do what it
wants to do but there will be other
moments where you feel a little bit
energized a little bit excited a little
bit happy or surprised in a pleasant way
and if you have not practiced what to do
with happiness when it comes up for you
you won't necessarily follow that
sensation through so all that this is is
the practice of following those
sensations through in our bodies as they
come up for us when they come up for us
and the cool thing is that the more you
practice both ends of the spectrum the
more balanced you become in your
approach to life overall and at the end
of the day that is all that secure
attachment is it's being able to respond
to what's actually happening in our
bodies as it's authentically happening
to us and not becoming neurotically
caught in either end of that emotional
spectrum so either holding on super
tightly to sadness or holding on super
tightly to happiness and
self-sufficiency there is very much a
time and a place for both of those
emotions and figuring out what that time
and place is and being able to show up
wholly and completely to every moment in
either direction is what gives us that
balanced approach to our emotional
systems overall my most recent favorite
thing to do is anytime someone asked me
how i've been is to respond that it
depends on the minute you catch me
because that is the absolute truth of my
life lately i am going through a lot of
stuff and it feels hard most days but
also like there are moments of
incredible joy and incredible hope and
incredible excitement which i think is
kind of a natural response to anything
going wrong in life every time we lose
something we necessarily open up space
for something else and so a balanced
approach to life is even through periods
of grief we can also recognize those
periods of joy and excitement and
opportunity that are now available for
us and on the flip side if you're
someone like myself who struggles more
with the sadness side of the spectrum it
can also be great to realize that during
the periods of our lives where things
are going really well there is also pain
and regret and struggle and challenges
that are inherent to even the absolute
best situations in our lives and as long
as we don't get too detached from either
side of that spectrum we're probably
doing okay
but for those of us who did not grow up
securely attached one side or the other
usually requires some practice so if
this video is one that you resonate much
more so with in the other video i want
to challenge you to just notice the next
time you feel some kind of upbeat
positive energy in your body and take a
minute to 90 seconds to just let that
energy out and feel it and experience it
in whatever way feels the most authentic
to you in that moment and it's fine if
it feels awkward and weird in whatever
way you're doing it because right now
all you're doing is laying down that
template and letting your body know it's
safe for me to let out this emotion and
oh look everyone i loved didn't
immediately abandon me as soon as i felt
like and leaned into the feeling of i'm
doing well for 90 seconds and this goes
into a much larger conversation about
attachment healing which i do promise we
will get to but for today i just want to
challenge all of us who feel like we air
too much on one side of the emotional
spectrum or the other to put some
practice work in to that side of the
spectrum that we find comes a little bit
less naturally to us um let me know in
the comments what that looks like for
you what your favorite way to express
any emotion is really because i think we
could all probably use some tips if
we've ended up here um but as always i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and i will
definitely see you back here again
really soon