hey guys heidi breve here i
chose to do the video that i'm making
today because for a little while i have
not felt like making any enfp videos
and the reason i've not felt like making
any is not because i don't love putting
out enfp videos i absolutely adore the
conversations we have
youtube is something that is very um
like inspiring and energizing for me
but for the last couple of weeks i've
been feeling like i don't have the
amount of energy that i want to have to
make specifically enfp videos and i
noticed myself thinking okay to make
these videos i have to be very like
upregulated very upbeat very bouncy and
happy because that is kind of the energy
that i think we stereotypically
associate with enfps for various reasons
and i also think that that is so far
from the full picture of who we are but
i think that often that is the part of
ourselves that we prefer to put out into
the world we like to seem like
everything is great and sunny and happy
and we can be very positive and
optimistic but there's also this other
side of us as there is to absolutely
every person and every personality type
that goes through and processes
life very deeply and very intensely and
it felt inauthentic to not bring that
aspect to the table as well so i noticed
that i didn't want to make a video
unless i was in that kind of upbeat
energy and it felt dishonest not to
so i thought well what is the most
authentic video i can make this week for
enfps and i decided that meeting myself
where i was at and showing up with where
i'm at was the best way to go and so
today we are doing a video on how to be
sad
now i feel a little bit scammy i think i
say this every time i make an enfp video
lately
but titling this only for enfps enfps
are not the only type that struggle with
sad and difficult emotions every single
person who's alive struggles with this
but i decided to make it enfp specific
because i want to talk about kind of
these specific challenges around
allowing oneself to feel sad that are
inherent to the cognitive function
stacking the enfps have so i will be
referencing that throughout the video
but a lot of what we talk about will not
be enfp specific so it does not
necessarily exclude other types i also
want to note that not every enfp will
experience difficulty feeling sadness so
i think that the ability to process
negative emotions and the readiness with
which we show up and
tend to negative emotions within
ourselves actually might be a little bit
more related to attachment so generally
those on the avoidant side of the
attachment spectrum tend to really
struggle to
um
notice when they're feeling sad or when
they're feeling upset or when they are
grieving or mourning something those on
the anxious side of the spectrum tend to
be almost hypersensitive to negative
emotions and they really notice them and
feel kind of consumed by them quite a
bit and then those who are secure tend
to experience negative and positive
emotions kind of in balance when it's
appropriate to and fearful avoidant um
is a bit more complicated so i'm not
going to go into that but that's kind of
the cole's notes the video i'm going to
make today is biased by my own
attachment
predisposition which is airing a little
bit more on the avoidant side of things
and really struggling to notice and take
sadness seriously rather than just
immediately try to fix it and move past
it and get to something better but
that's a struggle that i think both a
lot of enfps and a lot of more avoidant
leaning people tend to have so if one or
the other of those things applies to you
or if both apply this is likely going to
be a video that we can learn something
from or at least explore something
together through
so i was kind of half asleep the other
day and i woke up with a bit of a
headache and it was raining outside and
i am going through a period of loss in
my life just
um a period of morning a particular
person and
i woke up and i knew like it's going to
be a day where i do not feel energized
today i do not feel like i have my kind
of sunny optimism about me
and i started thinking about why i have
so few days like that
so personally even when i'm going
through something difficult i i tend to
experience difficulty staying with a
negative emotion like i'll feel it for
kind of a second and then my brain will
automatically be at work going okay but
what if you tried this and what about
this and oh now that this opportunity is
gone this new opportunity has opened up
let's go focus on that and my brain
loves to do that it just naturally very
instinctually tries to go there and so
i've been thinking lately about what
that is what is it about my own brain
that does not allow me to sit calmly
with sadness and let it kind of run its
course in my body because that is how we
process things right
and i started thinking about this term
that is mostly
not attachment related but um you hear
it a lot in like fields that deal with
cptsd with dysfunctional families and
the term is pathological hope
so it's this idea that no matter how
many times we kind of have a bad
relationship play out in a bad way no
matter how many times we have a negative
or harmful interaction with someone
there can be especially when you're a
child and the person is your parent a
kind of unrelenting belief that next
time it's going to be different and this
can be based on absolutely nothing this
also often applies in abusive
relationships
it can be based on things that are not
true indicators of things getting better
so let's say someone has this cycle of
behaving in a certain way and then they
apologize and every time you accept
their apology despite the fact that
absolutely nothing changes in between
and you can see this pattern continuing
to play up right so pathological hope is
this idea that we can feel optimistic
and hopeful even in the absence of
evidence that things are actually going
to get better and generally this is a
survival response so when you are a
child if you developed the tendency to
have pathological hope it is usually
because your parents were the ones who
were providing you with all of your
survival needs and to lose hope that
they were going to be able to provide
for you and show up in a loving and
consistent way for you would kind of be
to lose hope of your own survival so
instead the brain might wire itself to
have pathological hope about things
getting better in the future and if that
is the way you're brainwired as a young
child it's likely that you still really
struggle to not see the best in things
as an adult even when there is
overwhelming evidence that things are
not necessarily going to turn out for
the better now things turning out for
the better is a relative term because
often when we are attached to a certain
outcome we think that the only way
things can turn out for the better is if
we get that specific outcome we want but
there are about a million ways for
things to turn out for the better and
usually when we're up against a
significant obstacle something that is
making us really sad something that we
are really struggling to get what we
need out of the actual way to get things
better is to give up hope on that
specific thing and start exploring which
opportunities are available to us
outside of that thing but those of us
who have that tendency towards
pathological hope tend to feel like no
no no i'll just try 10 000 different
ways to make this one thing work and
this is where i want to bring in the
cognitive function stacking of the enfp
which is almost oriented in many ways
towards pathological hope so enfps are
known for being extremely optimistic for
seeing a million different opportunities
in the future for seeing a million
different ways to solve a given problem
and those are all wonderful traits but
one of the areas we get stuck is we can
get really really attached to certain
outcomes so
a good example of this that i always
like to think back on is in 2016 i moved
to new york and to make friends in new
york i decided to start doing improv
like all the time and actually one of my
entp friends who lived in new york
joined me doing improv all the time and
i always thought improv and enfps must
go directly together because any is so
creative so inventive it can pull ideas
out of the air but what i found was that
actually the type that is the best at
improv in my opinion tends to be sc and
fe valuing types because those are the
cognitive functions that allow us to
adapt most easily to the environment
that we're in no matter what is
happening at the time so any users are
kind of good at like kicking off a scene
and going okay here's a crazy idea i've
pulled out of the sky but then what we
struggle with is adapting to the scene
when it doesn't go the way that we want
it to so when any has this idea about
the future and let's say i go into an
improv scene and i'm like okay we're at
a saloon
great set the stage that is prime ground
for lots of stuff to happen but then i
have this idea in my head where i'm like
okay the next person who walks in is
going to say they're a cowboy and then
the next person walks in and because i
have no control over what my scene
partner does maybe they say i am a
hairdresser from new york city and in my
ne brain i'm probably still a little bit
stuck on that idea that i wanted someone
to walk in and be a cowboy so now i
might go oh so funny that you're also a
cowboy and sometimes that works but a
lot of the time it doesn't right a lot
of the time the scene is a lot funnier
and it goes a lot more smoothly when we
are adapting moment to moment to what's
happening and in every single moment we
are letting go of what we wanted to
happen next and accepting what's
happening in the moment and this is
something that in life enfps can be
particularly bad at
so we love to think about exciting
opportunities for the future we love to
try to figure out what we're going to do
next how things are going to go and we
are
notoriously bad at dropping those plans
when new information comes to light that
means that those plans would no longer
be a good idea that inferior introverted
sensing which gets really attached to
certain plans that we make for the
future will try and try and try and try
and try to make something happen or to
make a particular vision of the future
that we had play out even if it has long
since stopped making sense on many
levels right and we will use that idea
generation that comes so naturally to us
to try again and again and again to
force this vision of the future we had
into reality even when it no longer
makes sense and this to me reminds me of
that idea of pathological hope that idea
that if we just keep trying keep trying
keep trying keep trying keep trying we
will eventually get to this magical
future that we'd invented inside of our
minds despite the fact that there is
tons of evidence pointing in the other
direction
tons of evidence showing us that if we
were to let go of this idea we have for
the future grieve it actually accept
that things are not going to go the way
we want them to go
then we would be able to arrive on the
other side of that and actually notice
where we are what's going on which true
opportunities exist for us in the future
based on the reality that we are in at
this given moment right
and in order to get to that place we
have to learn how to be sad because
sadness
is the emotion that allows us to
recognize when something is not working
lay it to rest and move on but enfps can
be notoriously bad at doing that so this
video is called how to be sad but it is
turning into a video that is more about
all the ways in which we avoid sadness
and i think that that's something that
enfps are quite prone to doing is just
trying to make everything better trying
to look at the best in everything and
sometimes we're looking at the best in
things at the expense of what is healthy
and true for us
right
so we can keep ourselves in situations
that are not working that are no longer
making us happy that are no longer
serving the people involved much longer
than we should because we have this idea
that things were good once in the past
and so if we just try one of these
million ideas that we're constantly
generating to bring the past back into
the future then everything will
magically get better again but that is
unfortunately not how life works that is
just this way of keeping ourselves stuck
in this kind of alternate reality where
we never have to lose anything where we
never have to sit with that kind of
existential loneliness and hopelessness
that are the natural body responses to
big losses it's kind of like we are
eternally getting stuck in the
bargaining phase of the grieving process
so when you look at the five stages of
grief which is a famous grief model that
was originally designed around the five
kind of mental stages people went
through when they realized that they
were terminally ill but i think that
grieving anything in our life letting go
of anything that was once incredibly
important to us moves us in some way
through a grieving process if not those
five concrete stages of grief but one of
those grief stages is bargaining and
part of the bargaining phase is kind of
this inflated sense of autonomy over
life and how life works so in the grief
model this would look like someone
saying okay well i know that i have
cancer but maybe if i just eat really
healthy get super focused on my
treatment and do everything right then
the cancer will go away even though
maybe i've been told that it's terminal
and it's not that this is never a good
approach right absolutely do everything
you can to optimize your health if
you're terminally ill but sometimes this
is also a way of avoiding the reality of
what we're dealing with so someone in a
negative job or relationship or other
situation that is truly kind of
impairing our ability to show up with
the amount of energy that we want to
with our lives
we can tell ourselves things like well
if i just do this method of
self-improvement if i just try to change
my habits change the ways that i'm
showing up then maybe i can get this
thing back to where it was or to where i
imagined it to be in the future and i
think that getting stuck in that
bargaining phase is our way of avoiding
sadness and avoiding the grief process
that we have to go through there is a
book by a woman called helen russell
that i read this year that is called
same as this video how to be sad and
part of what i found really interesting
about the book was that she talks a lot
about crying and what kind of the
meaning and function of crying is for
humans this woman is a happiness
researcher who ended up writing a book
about how to experience sadness because
she found that experiencing sadness was
absolutely crucial for also feeling
happy and joyful in life
and she talks about how often we cry
when we feel helpless and hopeless so
crying can actually be this acceptance
of the fact that there's nothing else we
can do there is no other avenue to
pursue there's no further way forward in
the direction of this goal that we had
so intimately acquainted ourselves with
and i found that really interesting
thinking of sadness not as just a
negative emotion but as a helpless
feeling
as kind of an acceptance that the world
has won this one that the universe or
whatever it is that you want to call it
has not aligned this one in our favor
and that there is not anything we can do
within reason to get things to go the
way that we want them to and i think
that because enfps tend to be so
hopeful and so optimistic and so
creative in their thinking it can be
very difficult for us to accept that to
accept that we've arrived in a place
where there is not anything that we
could do where we truly have exhausted
every reasonable option and where the
only thing kind of left to do is
experience that despair and sit with
that feeling in our bodies
of sadness of loss
of wanting things to be one way and
accepting that they're another way
instead
all of that is very difficult for us and
in order to arrive at that place
we have to stop trying to change that
feeling of pain and loss and sadness
when it shows up for us in our bodies
and first we have to recognize what it
feels like when it shows up for us in
our bodies so for me it usually feels
like being very low energy like i don't
want to get out of bed like i wish i
could have a long bath and read a book
and that's all i had to do it feels like
the absence of
creative and intellectual energy
it feels like
doing basic things like interacting with
people and showing up at work would
require a significant
conscious shift in my energy
um which is not to say that those shifts
can't be done and that we can't go to
work and show up at social engagements
feeling a bit sad that's totally fine
but generally noticing that it would
require a kind of shift in body state to
be back to our happy optimistic selves
is going to be the first step in
realizing that there's probably
something in the realm of feeling
hopeless or helpless
or grief-stricken that your body is
asking you to spend some time processing
and if you are someone who like myself
tends to
almost instinctually
unconsciously without even consciously
thinking of this try to change that body
state so wake up feeling sad and go okay
i'm gonna get my coffee i'm gonna go
talk to a friend and have this kind of
list of running thoughts about what you
can do to change your physiological
state you might actually have to learn
to practice sitting with sadness and
really allowing yourself to be present
with it and to not run off into the land
of pathological hope that is probably a
lot more comfortable for you and i am
actually going to make another video on
this that i have had in my mind for a
long while called something along the
lines of um
avoidant attachment and the value of
suffering
so when you're on the avoidance spectrum
in terms of attachment you kind of
learned very young that suffering and
experiencing pain and processing
negative emotions does not have any
survival value for you and so that's
going to be deeply ingrained in your
somatic self in the way that you show up
in the world in the way that your body
naturally attempts to state change out
of sadness into something better and if
that's the case what actually has to be
relearned for you is what the value of
sadness and suffering is and how you can
use that sadness and suffering to your
advantage to actually give you a deeper
and more enriched and more well-rounded
experience of being alive because when
we don't know how to process sadness we
tend to get neurotic instead we beat
dead horses to death trying to make the
world resemble the world that we want to
be true inside of our minds and that
doesn't always really work out for us
and
learning to sit with unpleasant emotions
it can save us an immense amount of time
energy anxiety i think a lot of anxiety
that we feel is simply our brains being
extremely attached to a given outcome
and we get more and more anxious the
more evidence we acquire that that
outcome might not be what happens
um
like the opposite of anxiety is just
radical and total acceptance of the
present moment right living completely
and totally in the now and not
needing it to be different in any way
not trying to use our physiological
states to fight and push back against
the way things are and that's not to say
that we should never do that
but there are a lot of times where
there's immense value in just
recognizing that this sadness is telling
me something it is telling me that
the path i'm going down is not leading
me somewhere i want to go
it's telling me that my efforts are not
particularly working it's telling me
that it might be time to
let go
of this idea i had about the future and
allow just wide open space for a while
where i put nothing in that space and
just watch to see what shows up and to
follow any new opportunities that feel
interesting and exciting and enlivening
as they show up
and that's what we get when we move
through sadness we get to that place of
radical presence where we are no longer
looking at our lives and going how can i
make this what it's not
we are looking at our lives and going
how can i allow this to be what it is
and give absolutely everything i have
over to that how can i
show up as a dynamic co-creator in my
own actual experience
not as this kind of micromanager of
reality which
never works right
no matter how badly we want things to
work out a certain way nothing ever
resembles what we thought it would be
inside of our heads when we get there
and so the best way to show up to our
lives and by best i mean the least
distressing the least chronically
stressful on our nervous systems way
that we can show up to our lives is to
allow every single emotion that we feel
to be present in our bodies when we feel
it and to not perpetuate those feelings
with stories about the feelings and what
they mean and instead to just allow them
to be reactions to reality
and sometimes reality is sad sometimes
reality means losing things in people
and situations that we're not ready to
lose yet that we didn't want to lose
sometimes it means losing a future we
didn't want to lose a lot of grief i
think particularly that n dominant types
experience is grief over the future that
we had imagined
and there has to be a process of letting
that go
and allowing ourselves to return
to the present
and recognize what is here for us now
that whatever else has been lost
right
there's this quote i really like that i
don't know where it came from i'll look
it up you know i gotta i gotta attribute
my quotes there's a quote that is uh
attributed to lemony snicket who is such
a delightful
um
author
that goes all cannot be lost when there
is still so much being found
and i think that that is kind of the
flip side of allowing those losses to
happen in life when we push back and
refuse to accept reality as it is and
refuse to let ourselves grieve the
future that we wanted we are also
holding ourselves back from finding what
could be created in the absence of that
future so if we were to let go of
whatever it is we've been pushing so
hard to make work and accept that it's
gone and allow that feeling to live in
our bodies
eventually something else shows up and
we start finding new things
but if we have our blinders on and we
are spending all of our time beating
this dead horse of whatever it is that
we wanted to work out we don't notice
what else could be found what could be
much better things in the future when we
hold on out of fear to the things that
worked for us in the past
so
i guess this video is not as much about
how to be sad
as it is
why be sad why recognize the value of
sadness why allow it and invite it into
our bodies and in some cases even force
ourselves to amplify it a little bit
physiologically so like noticing in our
bodies what is my body telling me i need
today when i wake up feeling sad and
giving that to ourselves as best as
we're able to rather than saying okay
how do i state change how do i make
myself feel more bubbly more inspired
more excited so that i can do this thing
that i think i need to do how could i
bring that kind of sad more accepting
energy into my life because any time we
are acting in accordance with what's
showing up in our body we are acting in
a way that is accepting of our true
state and of reality which changes
moment to moment
so often i think that the paradox of
allowing ourselves to feel sad is that
it allows us to move through it and
actually get over it in a way that we
never would if we never moved through
that feeling if we never allowed
ourselves to just show up to our lives
with a bit of sadness for a while with a
bit of down regulated energy with a
little bit of a somber tone to the
things that we say and do if we don't
allow ourselves to make youtube videos
where the best we can do is not brush
our hair and keep our sweatpants on and
talk in a somber tone for half an hour
if that is the way that we can allow
ourselves to show up to our lives
eventually the truth about how we're
feeling will change and we will change
with it the only way we keep ourselves
stuck ironically in those bad feelings
is by resisting them and by trying to
show up differently in the world because
those bad feelings do not escape us
right we'll just get more and more and
more neurotic trying to recreate this
happiness because we are so afraid of
its opposite and its opposite is not
that bad honestly at the end of the day
sadness is tolerable it can be worked
through it can be moved through it is a
really important way of our bodies
saying hey
i appreciated something that was and
that no longer is and i'm gonna
take some time to honor that in myself
and that's kind of a beautiful part of
being alive is being able to honor what
we had that we no longer have we could
um get into an entire conversation about
the evolutionary purpose of sadness and
depression and loss but i don't have
that video in me today
um
but for now i think yeah i just want to
showcase
the other side of the nfp the side that
does have that ability to be very
present
with emotions that are not particularly
hopeful and energized and optimistic and
acknowledge that there is a very healthy
way to move through those feelings and
it's not denying them and trying to
change them into something else it is
just letting them be and i do want to
acknowledge before i let you go that
there are lots of enfps on the other
side of let's say the attachment
spectrum where the problem can be
getting caught in negative emotions and
getting caught in telling ourselves this
story over and over and over again about
something negative which perpetuates
those physiological responses of sadness
and grief and that can become a little
bit pathological in itself and that is
definitely a video for another time um
this video is kind of making the case
for sadness if it is something that you
try to rid yourself of using your happy
hopeful optimistic cognitive functions
so let me know in the comments um which
of you that resonates for like which of
you really struggle to deal with sadness
and to accept it into your body and
process it and move through it versus
which of you tend to experience the
opposite and struggle with getting
caught in those feelings of sadness and
grief and pain
um because i do think that this is kind
of a polarizing one for enfps and i'm
very curious about who falls where on
that spectrum
but for now i hope that you're taking
care of yourselves
i love you and i will see you back here
again soon
[Music]