hey guys heidi preep here welcome back
to my channel if you are not new here
welcome to my channel if you are today i
wanted to talk about something that
kind of touches a lot of the different
systems that we talk about on my channel
so there can be parallels drawn to this
phenomenon in myers-briggs in the
enneagram in attachment theory and
because this is a topic that is so
prevalent in all of these different
personality psychology tools i think
that sometimes we don't make a clear
distinction between the healthy
expression of this thing and the
unhealthy expression of this thing and i
have only recently like in the past year
or so of my life come to even realize
that there is a big difference between
the healthy and unhealthy versions of
this and what that thing is is
fantasizing or daydreaming
so fantasies and daydreams not
inherently bad things right if we never
zoned out a little bit and thought about
what a better life for ourselves and
other people would look like in the
future we would never have any
innovation we would not have any change
in the world we need the ability to
think of a better future in order to
build that better future right first we
have to be able to conceptualize
something then we can bring it into
existence but for certain people
especially if you have a certain
personality profile that predisposes you
to loving fantasy and then let's say a
certain attachment style that makes
fantasy feel incredibly real for you in
some cases almost more real than real
life fantasies can become very
maladaptive very quickly so there
actually is a term for this and the term
that i want to talk about to start this
off is the term maladaptive daydreaming
so the term maladaptive daydreaming has
different definitions depending on what
site you go to but the first one that
pops up for me when i type it into
google is maladaptive daydreaming
describes a condition where a person
regularly experiences daydreams that are
so intense and highly distracting so
distracting in fact that the person may
stop engaging with the task or people in
front of them so this is a form of
daydreaming that actually prevents you
from keeping close contact with the
world around you and will have you
missing things that are happening right
in front of your eyes in favor of the
fantasy world that you're engaging with
inside of your head now if you are let's
say an enfp or infp personality type
this might feel very familiar to you in
fact this is kind of the water that you
have been swimming in for much of your
life is missing things that are
happening in the real world because you
are busy focusing on the world that is
inside of your mind this might also be
the case if you are of any personality
type but you identify as either anxious
or fearful avoidant in terms of your
attachment system now interestingly
avoidantly attached individuals will
also have a measure of maladaptive
daydreaming but it shows up differently
and not as consciously as it does for
anxious and fearful avoidance so in this
video i'm going to more specifically
reference the way that it shows up for
those on the anxious spectrum who tend
to consciously experience very vivid and
very detailed daydreams about the life
that they wish they had particularly in
relation to their romantic life so i
came across the term maladaptive
daydreaming i'm not sure when a couple
of years ago i didn't think much of it
and then about a year ago i started
learning about the term limerence which
is basically the psychological term for
a really intense crush where you meet
someone and they have this like glow
about them and you're like this person's
going to be the answer to all of my
problems and i realized when i learned
the term limerence like ah i've
done that so many times in my life and i
started to realize how much that could
be maladaptive for me how much i could
be missing really big red flags in
people because i have limerence around
them so i just paint those flags green
in my head and pummel forwards right and
that definitely will not be an
unfamiliar experience to anyone who is
insecurely attached and so for a period
of time actually inspired by a friend
who took this initiative on first i
decided to completely stop daydreaming
so the friend who started doing this
first was telling me about how they no
longer listened to music they no longer
zoned out when they were walking
somewhere they were very intentional
about keeping their focus in reality in
a way that they usually did not do and i
was so inspired by that and thought that
that was so cool so i was like okay i'm
gonna try it out for myself and for a
while i got incredible results out of
this i started noticing just how much
time i spent dissociated i spent in
fantasy i spent making things up about
myself and other people and the way that
other people thought and felt and
experienced the world and i realized
that if you actually just go talk to
those people and ask them questions
instead of assuming what you think they
know you often get very surprising
results that helps you actually get
close to people instead of just going
off the fantasy version of them that you
have in your head and i also realized
that not fantasizing saved me a lot of
time this was the phase of my life where
i started reading like a book a day
because i used to go for multi-hour long
walks and during those walks i would
always just associate into fantasy think
about the life that i wish i was living
and instead in that time i started
listening to audiobooks and i was like
this is so cool i'm getting smarter i'm
learning more information i am getting
to know people better and more
accurately this is the answer to
everything except i also started getting
really depressed because i quickly
learned that daydreams are actually kind
of important for me in many ways because
they help me understand what's not
working for me in my current life so if
i spend a lot of time fantasizing about
something it's usually because there's
something in that fantasy that i want to
bring into my current life and
eventually if i spend enough time
fantasizing about it i will generally
find a way to work that in so fantasies
for me i realized were yes in some form
maladaptive and getting in the way of
reality but in other forms were actually
giving me really important information
about what i needed to bring into my
reality so all-consuming constant
fantasies were not the solution but
neither was completely eliminating
fantasy right i needed to find some kind
of middle ground and to do that i had to
sit down with myself and learn to
dissect what a healthy versus an
unhealthy fantasy is how i can tell the
difference and in many cases how i can
take an unhealthy fantasy and actually
make it a healthy one so there is a term
that goes around self-help circles like
crazy lately especially coaching circles
and that term is limiting beliefs so
limiting beliefs are often talked about
as things that we believe about
ourselves that aren't necessarily true
and that limit our ability to expand our
potential so let's say i believe i will
never make more than a certain amount of
money because growing up no one in my
family ever made more than a certain
amount of money and i believe that it's
just not possible for me that's
something that other people do this is
kind of the most common example that i
see people using the term limiting
beliefs around if i believe that the
theory goes i might constantly
self-sabotage when i start making more
money i might start getting really
negative judgments about myself and what
it means about who i am as a human being
if i have a certain amount of money so
the idea behind limiting beliefs is that
you have to find a way to bust through
them in order to expand your life expand
your awareness and start welcoming
things into your life that you otherwise
would think psychologically were not
possible now i think that there is a lot
of truth to this and i actually think
that in healthy doses fantasies can help
us bust through limiting beliefs but i
think that in unhealthy doses fantasies
can actually keep us stuck in them so
let's say that i want a beautiful happy
harmonious relationship right and this
is very common with anyone on the
anxiously attached spectrum to have
something that we call a magical future
fantasy so a magical future fantasy is
when you spend all of this time and
emotional energy thinking about the
beautiful perfect wonderful relationship
or family that you're gonna have at an
unspecified time in the future well in
reality you actually have no idea how to
build a healthy relationship or how to
raise a healthy family and so you don't
have the actual tools to get you there
but you have this very vivid fantasy
world inside of your mind that you
believe is real you believe once i get
into the right relationship i will just
instinctively know what to do once i
have a family i will just instinctively
know what to do and so in this way
having this vivid fantasy world actually
disconnects us from reality and reality
is the place where we would need to live
for long enough to build the tools to
actually have a healthy relationship to
actually be aware of where our blind
spots are to actually work with another
person to build a family in a way that
is non-destructive right so in a weird
way dissociating into this fantasy all
the time actually limits our ability to
act in reality in a way that would align
with the end goal that we want which is
that healthy happy future but it might
feel like you're using the fantasy to
bust through your limiting beliefs right
because you're like oh maybe i've never
seen a healthy happy family unit but i
can imagine one and i can use that
imagination to create it now i think
that this is where we have to be really
careful about the distinction between
healthy and unhealthy fantasy because
healthy fantasy allows us to find
something that we could pursue that is
different from what we currently have
and if we can balance out that fantasy
with reality and keep ourselves grounded
in what it's actually going to take to
get there on concrete daily terms that
fusion of fantasy and reality can bring
us to incredible places and it can also
help us to dream and imagine a better
future for ourselves than we may have
thought possible so we can't discard
fantasy entirely but we do have to be
aware of when we are actually over
relying on it to the detriment of us
getting there so the question is not
fantasy or not fantasy it is how to
merge fantasy with reality and the first
thing i'm going to let you know is that
it's going to get a lot less fun when
you do it this way okay because a lot of
the time we are dissociating into
fantasy we're not actually creating a
blueprint for our future lives what
we're trying to do is dissociate from
the lives that we are currently living
maybe because we're not happy in the
lives that we're currently living often
because we think that there is such a
gap between the lives that we want and
the lives that we have that we don't
even think we could get there
realistically but we do think if i
dissociate and imagine myself already
having that thing i get a pretty good
hit of the feeling like i get a hit of
what it would be like if i had it
without actually having to do the work
of getting it so staying stuck in
fantasy is a very appealing option and i
totally get that but interestingly
that's another example of when you are
letting your limiting beliefs run your
life you think i could never actually
have this life whether this life means
that you are more successful than you
are in your field whether it means you
are in the type of relationship you
don't think you could ever actually have
whether it means that you look a certain
way talk a certain way act a certain way
show up in a way that you don't have the
confidence to show up in in the world as
it stands fantasy is a very quick route
to getting the feeling without doing the
work right and ironically if you are a
bit of a fantasy addict or someone who
dissociates often into fantasy it's
probably because you have low
self-esteem in the real world you don't
feel competent enough to go for what you
actually want and so you use that
fantasy as kind of a blanket to comfort
you around the fact that you don't
believe you could have those things does
that make sense and so if that's the
case what your fantasies might be
alerting you to is where your limiting
beliefs are you might be fantasizing
about what you think you can't have and
if you can learn to approach that
fantasy in a way that grounds it in
reality you can actually use it as more
of a guidepost towards what you need to
work on developing how do you do this
you get realistic about your fantasy so
i have a terrible fear of airplanes i
absolutely hate getting on them i hate
flying every single time i get on a
flight i'm like this fight is crashing i
like call people that i love before i
get on flights and i'm like i have
appreciated having you in my life thank
you mother for raising me thank you
friend for loving me thank you person
sitting next to me in the seat for this
brief moment of company that we will
share as the plane plummets into the
ground every time i get in a plane i
think that and it took me many years to
realize that one of the main reasons why
i felt that way was because a lot of the
time when i was getting on planes i
would be going somewhere and i would
have a giant fantasy about what it was
going to be like when i got there so i
would be let's say going on a trip to
south africa and i'd be like when i'm in
south africa i'm going to be living the
most incredible explorative exciting
life i'm going to be on safaris every 10
minutes i'm going to feel so alive and
so awake and so energized and i had a
limiting belief around the fact that i
could have that life right i thought i
didn't deserve it i thought that because
for generations in my family travel
wasn't really something that people
could afford or had access to i
shouldn't have that i should have guilt
around the fact that i can access that
and so i made up this story in my head
that because this thing is too good to
be true something bad is going to happen
on my way there and it must be that my
plane is going to crash because what
else really could go that wrong now
interestingly something i started
noticing after i was a digital nomad for
like five or six years and traveled over
and over and over again was that of
course reality never matched up to my
expectations of a trip right the trip
that i imagined myself going on and the
trip that i actually ended up taking
were always two completely and totally
different things and this actually
became a little bit comforting for me to
the point where i'd be sitting in the
airport waiting to board my plane and i
would be telling myself okay you have
this overwhelming fantasy about what's
gonna happen on your trip but if you can
balance out that fantasy with some
realistic things that are probably going
to happen on your trip it actually
easens that guilt feeling you have and
allows you to feel less scared about the
plane ride because now i was looking at
reality instead of fantasy and reality
never really feels like it's too much
for us to have because here's the truth
on the other side of your limiting
beliefs on the other side of the life
that you think is too good for you to
have there is just a whole bunch of new
problems if you start making a hundred
thousand dollars more than you're making
now yes of course it will change your
life and improve your circumstances in
many ways but it will also add a
plethora of brand new problems into your
life that you don't have to deal with
right now if you get that partner of
your dreams and you're in a happy
harmonious relationship and raising a
new family together yes it might give
you something that you want but it will
also pose to you an incredible number of
new challenges that currently you don't
have to worry about at all and i think
that the more we can round out our
fantasies with the reality of what it
would look like if we were to achieve
that thing the less impossible they
start to feel because often the reason
we have limiting beliefs is because we
believe that if i got that thing i would
never have problems again and the human
mind knows that's not true right so if
you have this huge incredible fantasy
about something and you're like yeah i'm
going to go on this trip or i'm going to
date this person or i'm going to get
this job and then nothing bad is ever
going to happen again your brain's gonna
freak out a little bit because your
brain knows that that is too good to be
true right it is in the way that you're
imagining it because you're probably
imagining it as perfect and nothing is
perfect everything that is really good
is also balanced out by some worse
aspects or buy some things that are
challenging to cope with and the more
that you can make your realities reflect
both what would be good about this
different life that you want and also
what would be challenging about this
life that you want the better you're
going to be able to access the actual
concrete steps you would need to take in
reality to build your way towards those
fantasies because now you're dealing
with the truth so for example let's say
you have this fantasy of yourself as
very rich but what you leave out of the
fantasy is that in order to get really
rich maybe you had to build up a
business maybe you had to work really
hard for a period of time maybe you had
to make some high-stakes decisions that
were really stressful and if you leave
that out of your fantasy then as soon as
you're trying to build towards that in
the real world and you encounter
something challenging or difficult or
stressful you're gonna be like wait wait
this isn't my fantasy right this is my
stopping point because in my fantasy i
have no problems so that means that this
path that i'm taking towards getting
there must not be the path that's taking
me there you're gonna hit those
disillusionment points over and over and
over again but if you have a healthy
fantasy where you're saying okay i want
a different outcome which also means i'm
going to have to accept a set of
different problems that are paired with
that outcome now you're talking about a
fantasy that is realistic because what
you're wanting is not a perfect or
idealized version of your life what
you're looking at is simply a different
option
right just something else that you could
choose with its own pros and its own
cons and that is an adaptive fantasy or
an adaptive daydream because that
actually offers you a realistic window
into a different life that you could
have and that you could choose and it
gives you an idea of the steps you would
have to take to get there as opposed to
a fantasy that is maladaptive which
completely disconnects you from reality
gets you imagining a world that could
not possibly exist and convinces you
that that is the world that you could
have and of course we never end up
getting to those fantasies because they
are fantasies about a world that does
not exist every single good thing that
happens comes in at least some small way
with a brand new set of challenges and a
brand new set of things you have to deal
with that are a little bit annoying and
a little bit difficult or in some cases
a lot annoying and a lot difficult and
if we want to start moving towards our
dreams we have to accept that we are
moving towards a version of our lives
that is not better or worse it just has
higher level or different challenges and
ironically at the end of the day this
can also feel like a little bit of a
relief because it helps us to realize
why we might not have that thing right
now and make an actual pro and con list
inside of our minds about how badly we
want it maybe i want more money but i
don't want to sacrifice the freedom that
i currently have and once i really sit
with that and think about it and
recognize why it is that i haven't
sacrificed all of my spare time to go
chasing a side hustle that could make me
more money the easier it's going to be
for me to accept that actually i kind of
have a situation i'm happy with and now
i understand what the trade-off would
need to be if i were to change my
circumstance so now i am negotiating
with myself instead of deluding myself
and then becoming anxious or depressed
the second those delusions do not
translate into reality which delusions
never do so to sum all of this up i
think that a really good litmus test for
whether we're dealing with a healthy or
adaptive fantasy versus an unhealthy or
maladaptive fantasy is are we aware of
which new challenges or problems would
crop up if we were to achieve that
fantasy and are we actually
realistically weighing out our desire to
deal with those challenges if so then we
can start making concrete steps in
reality towards that if it's what we
want or away from it if it's what we
don't but if we are not looking at any
of the negative aspects of what would
happen if we were to achieve a certain
end we are probably stuck in a
maladaptive fantasy that we are not
using to improve our circumstances we
are using to dissociate from our
circumstances sometimes for myriad
reasons we are not ready or
psychologically prepared to stop
frequently dissociating yet dissociation
is a trauma response because it shields
us from things that our minds are not
yet ready to unpack so my suggestion is
not necessarily to tell yourself no more
fantasies ever again but i do recommend
rounding out your fantasies where and
when you can to include the realistic
steps that would actually help you move
towards them so that they become less
pie in the sky ideal futures and more
futures that you could actually create
okay that is all i have to say for today
on this topic as always i love you guys
i hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other leave in the comments any
thoughts or feelings or aha moments that
might have come up for you over the
course of this video i'm always curious
what you guys are thinking and
experiencing and until next time i love
you guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again soon
[Music]