hey guys Heidi PRI here I tried to
record this video twice already this
week which is why it's coming out so
late I usually try to get something out
by like midweek but this past weekend I
went to my Cottage and I got sunburnt
which usually does not happen I very
rarely burn but I was on my dock reading
the book The Midnight Library which by
the way is like NFP crack if you're
looking for a fiction book and I
completely lost track of time and the
weirdest part was that my lips burnt
really badly which like I did not know
could happen I didn't know you could
sunburn your lips but yeah they burnt
and then got like super dried out and it
was so weird and painful and also it
looked super distracting on video so I'm
recording this for the third time cuz
it's like mostly gone I've got like
still a little tiny patch of it um but
hopefully third time's a charm and this
works out this time and you're not
distracted by my red skin so this video
is by I'm not going to say popular
demand like one person asked me and I
was like yeah sure I'll make that video
because the other week I released a
video on ENFP productivity and someone
had requested if I could do the same
thing for infps and I figured that even
though enfps and infps share the same
cognitive functions so they all use fi
NE T and Si it would be useful to look
at what those cognitive functions look
like when they're in a slightly
different order which is how it works in
the in fp's brain so I made this promise
at the beginning of the ENFP video and
I'm going to do the same here that this
video is not going to be about trying to
hyper structure your life it's not going
to be an attempt to turn you into an
ESTJ because I think that the more
you're trying to model the behaviors of
a type that doesn't come naturally to
you the quicker you're going to burn
yourself out and if we're talking
productivity we have to talk about how
to not burn out and in order to not burn
out as an infp you have to learn how to
enjoy being productive okay because I
don't care what anyone says that is the
key to productivity for everyone the
reason that estjs and entjs are
hyperproductive is because they
genuinely enjoy the feeling of getting
stuff done and Crossing things off a
to-do list and planning for the days and
weeks and months and years ahead okay if
you enjoy that of course you're going to
do it all the time right but your
creative process is something totally
different and in order to be productive
you have to learn how to lean into that
process and how to structure your time
in a way that you actually really enjoy
and feel energized by or else you're
never going to get anything done so this
video is going to be about holistic
productivity and how to harness your
natural skills and abilities and
cognitive functions as an infp in order
to help you put some structure around
the things that feel really meaningful
for you so that you can get them done
and just produce more of whatever it is
that you love in your life because I
think that that should always be the end
goal by the way if you don't know what
I'm talking about when I say cognitive
functions I'm talking about the cast of
characters that make up your brain as an
infp so I do run a 6- week infp Soul
boot camp program where I introduce you
to introverted feeling extroverted
intuition introverted sensing and
extroverted thinking as little cartoon
characters that govern the inside of
your mind and we talk about things like
emotional intelligence goal setting
creativity and career and a whole range
of other things that infps tend to
either struggle with or just find really
interesting and the focus is to make you
feel more like yourself not less as is
the focus of this video so in the
interest of being productive with this
time let's start talking about what that
looks like for infps so there's this
quote that I dropped somewhere in the
middle of the ENFP video that I'm just
going to open with here I don't remember
where this quote comes from or who said
it unfortunately but it's the idea that
people who think they have a time
management problem usually don't have a
time management problem they have an
emotional management problem okay and
that doesn't mean that you have too many
emotions it doesn't mean your emotions
are too much it just means that
sometimes when we feel like we're unable
to complete the goals that we want to
complete or to structure our time
effectively the problem is actually that
we're not dealing with our emotions
effectively and we're not acknowledging
them in the proper way and we're not
giving them the seriousness that we need
to give them in order for those emotions
to kind of clear the way for us to focus
on other things so I think that what a
lot of infps naturally do when they're
trying to get themselves to like zero in
and get a bunch of work done is tell
themselves okay it's time to ignore my
emotions and that's actually the
complete opposite of what I'm going to
recommend that we start with when we
start talking about infps and
productivity so we have to look at
everything through the lens of how your
mind is made up right you are a dominant
introverted Feeler and what that means
is that you're very naturally and deeply
in tune with your subjective
interpretations of the world so what you
perceive to be good or bad just or
unjust interesting or uninteresting you
cannot turn off the part of your brain
that is constantly making subjective
value judgments about the world around
you and that's a wonderful thing that's
your superpower but it also means
sometimes when you sit down to work your
brain is screaming at you to emotionally
process something that really isn't
conducive to the work that you're trying
to do if at any point you need me I will
be here here I will also be here when
you don't need me important work meeting
love it time to think about the futility
of The Human Experience having a
completely normal conversation with a
stranger at a bus stop Don't Mind If I
Do interject with a fantasy about the
two of you marrying off the coast of
France in an off-white gwn with a flute
quartet Serena you from afar anyway what
can I say it's just what I do best and
the first thing I'm going to encourage
you to do is not to try to shut down
that part of your brain but to actually
bring it to the surface and validate it
so I am an anfp but inverted feeling is
very high up in my cognitive stacking as
well and something I like to do when I'm
sitting down and trying to get down to
work and I'm distracted by a lot of
emotions or thoughts is just write them
down on a piece of paper and then make
an appointment with myself to visit
those emotions properly at a time in the
day that is better for me okay and this
seems ridiculous it seems absolutely
ludicrous to like make an appointment
with yourself to think about your own
feelings but the problem is that
Emotions Don't Go away until we deal
with them because emotions are very
important Messengers for our brain right
they're how we evaluate the world around
us and how we should act and behave and
what we should focus our attention on so
if we just tell our emotions don't
bother me what happens our emotions just
get louder and louder and louder because
they have something valuable to say so
what can be helpful is just writing down
whatever thoughts or feelings are
distracting you and then looking at that
list validating it going yeah this is
some stuff I could really stand to sit
down with pay some attention to find
some solutions for between 3:00 and 3:20
I come back to this emotional experience
and I will think about it for a while
and then this is very important you have
to actually do it I don't care if by
3:00 you're not feeling that emotion
anymore you made an appointment with
yourself in order to build
accountability with yourself you have to
show up to that appointment if you check
in with yourself at 3: and your emotions
are like oh hey cool no no worries I
resolved that in the meantime we don't
need to worry about it that's cool you
can move on to the next thing but if you
tell yourself I'm going to check in with
myself at 3 and then you don't do it the
next day if you try this exercise again
guess what it's not going to work
because your unconscious brain goes you
never returned to this yesterday so now
I don't trust you when you tell me that
we're going to return to it later today
okay when you are validating your
emotional experience by telling it this
is important it's just not the right
time and then you actually make a point
to show up for yourself and process and
work with those emotions when it is time
you're going to start to build a sense
of trust with yourself and it will take
a bit of time but that sense of self
trust will eventually help you to quiet
your mind a little bit during the times
when you do really need to put something
aside mentally because you're not
telling yourself what you're thinking or
feeling is unimportant you're telling
yourself it is important and I am going
to deal with it and here's when and that
allows that part of you that maybe feels
a bit frantic or like there's something
really imminent to calm down and go okay
I'm going to be seen I'm going to be
heard I'm going to be dealt with and I
know exactly when so for now I can leave
this be and you'll find that if you
practice this over and over and over
again the more you build that self trust
the better it will work so that's tip
number one if you really need to put
some sort of emotion or thought to the
side temporarily make an appointment for
when you'll come back to that emotion or
thought and then go to the appointment
and do this as many times as you need to
but ideally you actually don't have to
put your emotions aside to get good work
done so that leads us to point number
two instead of trying to put aside your
introverted feeling in order to do work
literally learn to harness your
introverted feeling in order to improve
your experience with working and the way
that I recommend you do this is by
pairing your work with something that
already makes you feel really good so
the first part of doing this is figuring
out which negative emotions you already
have paired with certain work projects
so for myself I tend to procrastinate
the most and be the least productive
when I feel incompetent at something so
if I sit down and look at my work and
I'm like H I don't know what to write
for this chapter I don't know what to
say on this video I will go into
overwhelm mode okay and when I'm in that
mode it's really hard to be productive
and so to counter this I think to myself
what makes me feel competent naturally
what am I already good at
which things do I already pretty well
have down and how can I pair one of
those things with this assignment so for
example there are a couple of meals that
I know how to cook really really well
I've had a lot of practice my SI is
internalized exactly how many spices go
into the recipe and when and how long to
cook it for and when to check it and so
if I need to write a chapter that I'm
feeling not so confident about but I
have a time crunch I will go okay I'm
going to make this meal that I know I'm
really good at making while I'm writing
this chapter so I will season the
chicken pop it in the oven and then give
myself 20 minutes to just sit down and
write as much as I can as quickly as I
can take it out of the oven put in the
carrots sit down again write another
part of the chapter as quickly as I can
and this plays on two different things
right it plays on my extroverted
thinking a little bit because I'm giving
myself time frames to work within but
it's also allowing me to step into my
work with an energy of confidence
present because I'm doing something that
I know I do well and that I know I can
do well on autopilot and so my body is
now in confidence mode I'm feeling good
and capable which is the exact energy
that I need to feel in order to do my
work and for you maybe it's not cooking
maybe it's journaling maybe it's doing
something creative maybe it's going for
a walk through nature it can be
literally anything as long as it gets
you in that mode of feeling confident
capable or whatever else the emotional
antidote might be to the emotional
problem that is getting in the way of
you doing your work if your work
triggers feelings of stupidity do
something that makes you feel really
smart if your work makes you feel
stressed find something that makes you
feel relaxed and schedule work blocks in
between practicing that thing the idea
here is just to get your physiology
rewired in a way that kind of hijacks
your nervous system and allows you to
approach the work task with a new energy
it's like a fun symbiotic relationship
forming a lot of the time the problem is
not that you can't do something it's
just that you have forgotten the part of
yourself that is capable of doing that
so you just need to give yourself a
little reminder to get that person back
in business which kind of leads us to
the third productivity tip for fi which
is defining Yourself by the kind of
person you want to be rather than the
actions you take and this is a tactic
that I directly lifted from Atomic habit
so this is not my idea it is James
clear's idea he is a habit formation
expert and he talks a lot in his book
about how we stick with things the
hardest when we believe that they are in
line with our identity and this is your
superpower already as an infp okay you
are very in tune with who you are what
you like what you don't like what you're
interested in what you believe is right
or wrong how you Define yourself and how
you show up in the world is already what
you like to think about so we can now
take that natural tendency and apply it
to your work life if you are
continuously making long lists for
yourself and then not getting any of
them done it's probably because that
list is not aligned with the way that
you think of yourself you're trying to
act as though you're someone you're not
however you can change the way that you
start to think of yourself and then
those actions become a lot easier so
there is a quote from Atomic habits that
I really like that I'm going to read to
you verbatim
every action you take is a vote for the
type of person you wish to become so the
way that James Clear explains this is
instead of thinking about what you have
to get done or what items are on your
to-do list think about what kind of
person do I want to be and then your
action is a vote for or against that
kind of person so do I want to be a kind
of person who wakes up early well if I
were the kind of person who wakes up
early what would I do around 10: p.m.
each night would I start surfing the
internet or would I start powering down
to go to sleep so that I could wake up
sometime around 600 and that going to
bed early is a vote for the kind of
person you want to be when you wake up
at 600 the next morning that's a vote
for the kind of person you want to be
when you don't drink a coffee at 5:00
p.m. which I am tremendously guilty of
that is a vote for the kind of person
you want to be so it's not just about
what you're doing it's about the
identity that you're constructing for
yourself and what's nice about this is
that it takes the pressure off each
individual circumstance right let's say
you want to be the kind of person who is
very active in their day-to-day life you
don't have to have a great workout every
time you don't have to eat perfectly you
don't have to run the fastest every time
you go for a jog all you have to do is
show up again and again and again and
keep making tiny votes for the kind of
person you want to be and those votes
eventually accumulate into an identity
and once you identify with the actions
that you take you are much much more
likely to continue to take them because
we get very attached to our identities
especially when you have fi as your
dominant function so this is more of a
long-term strategy but when you're
looking at setting longer term goals
worry less about am I doing the hardest
workout every day am I showing up at the
absolute top of my game every time at
work am I getting to bed earlier and
earlier every night we don't have to do
everything 100% in order to be moving in
the direction of being the kind of
person who does this kind of thing a
person who is usually active could
probably skip a week of activity and
then get right back into it the next
week a person who generally wakes up
early probably sleeps in every once in a
while but they don't let that deter them
from getting back into their normal wake
up early habit as soon as they feel well
rested again if we were the kind of
person who did these things we wouldn't
have to do them every single day all of
the time we would just have to do them
more often than not and that takes a lot
of pressure off of our long-term goals
it becomes progress not Perfection okay
extroverted intuition is your second
cognitive function and this is the part
of your brain that really likes to cross
contextualize information hey guys what
are we doing in
here Fi Fi said that it would be fun if
we stayed up all night researching poly
vagel Theory and I mean you know I don't
think of time in a linear sense so I was
in so any likes to cast a very wide net
intellectually it likes to research a
lot of different theories understand
things from multiple different angles
and then it likes to cross reference all
of those ideas figure out which one of
these things is not like the others and
in which way and what is this beautiful
kind of pearl of wisdom that pulls it
all together and in order to
self-actualize in any form as an infp
you have to accept that that is how your
brain works you do not have that same
laser focus that other types might have
because your intellectual mind is kind
of more like a playground for you and
that's a wonderful thing work with that
okay so I was thinking about this when I
was babysitting my nieces I have three
nieces who are all under 10 years old
and if you want anyone between the ages
of like 1 and 10 to do absolutely
anything you have to make them think
that it was their idea and because your
brain as an NP type is kind of like a
child on a playground you have to treat
it the same way so if you tell your
extroverted intuition focus on one thing
it absolutely will not focus on that one
thing it will focus on that one thing
and also 10 other things that that thing
reminds it of okay cool let's work with
that like a child you have to give your
extroverted intuition options okay let
it feel like it has chosen what to focus
on so for NP types I actually really
highly recommend always having multiple
projects on the go deliberately to an
extent your brain just needs to jump
around that's how it works best so if
you have an option of three different
things you could work on it makes your
brain feel like it has some breathing
room okay if you sit down at your desk
in the morning and you go I have to do
this one thing what happens if you tell
a four-year-old that no even if that's
what they wanted to do they don't want
to do it cuz now they have to you can
treat your brain the same way tell it
you get to pick what we do this morning
here are three things I need to get done
where do you want to start and I really
encourage you to listen to your natural
energy here if you start on one task and
it's really really draining your energy
and you're really not getting where you
want to get to with it allow yourself to
switch Focus try task B and I recommend
that you don't pick let's say three
tasks that you have to get done for work
let one of them be a personal project or
a passion project and let yourself take
breaks and focus on that for a little
bit if that's what you need to put
yourself back in the zone giving
yourself permission to work on the thing
that you're not supposed to be working
on makes your brain feel kind of like
rebellious and excited and that puts you
in Creative Energy a lot of the time
right so if you let yourself Rebel a
little bit do some of that work you're
not supposed to be doing and then come
back to the work that you are supposed
to be doing you're probably going to
come back into it with a lot more energy
than you originally had so treat your
extroverted intuition like a child in a
playground give it lots of room to
explore give it lots of different
options for what it could focus on and
then let it take the resins because when
you let it do that playing and exploring
and experimenting it comes up with
absolutely brilliant results you just
have to let it run its natural course
with a little bit of Parental structure
in place next metaphor for extroverted
intuition because this is also the part
of your brain that is a metaphor junkie
is going to be treating your extroverted
intuition like a cake that you are
baking okay I made banana bread this
morning and the way that you make banana
bread like the way that you make any
loaf of bread is you put a whole bunch
of different things together and then
you mix them all together and then you
put it in an oven and some scientific
stuff that I don't understand happens
and then you take it out and it is in a
different and more digestible form and
this is also the way that you are going
to produce your best ideas as someone
who uses extroverted intuition step one
get all the right ingredients so so so
so so often when NP types are feeling
burnt out it's not an output problem
it's an input problem they are not
feeding their brains a wide enough
variety of information it's like trying
to make banana bread with only bananas
and baking powder okay that's not going
to give you a loaf you need to add more
things in so if you are feeling
creatively uninspired maybe you are not
feeding your brain enough new ideas and
theories and Concepts give yourself time
and space to fill your mind up with new
experiences new theories new thoughts
new emotions talk to different people
walk through different parts of your
city pick up a book on a topic that you
would normally never pick up feed your
brain a wide variety of things and then
you're going to pick which of those
things are going to be the ingredients
for whatever it is that you're trying to
work on and you're going to put those
things in an oven so here's how this
works extroverted intuition does not go
from brain to paper or from brain to
computer or from brain to meeting okay
extroverted intuition needs to work with
inverted sensing in order to figure out
what the best synthesis of ideas is so
you need to give your brain lots of
stimulation lots of different things to
to think about and then you need to find
some sort of practice for how you're
going to bring those ideas together and
produce something as a result of them so
I can't remember if this one is from
Atomic habits or deep work but one of
those two books recommends figuring out
what problem it is you're trying to
solve so let's say there's something at
work that you need to come up with a
solution to ask yourself the question
very intentionally spend a bit of time
brainstorming which things are related
to that thing and what concepts you need
to keep at the Forefront of your brain
in order to solve it it and then go for
a really long walk and just let your
mind passively focus on it so try to
keep your attention in the arena of this
problem that you're trying to solve and
continuously guide your attention back
to how could all of these different
things come together to form the
solution but Ponder this while you're
doing something else something very
calming that you can do on autopilot go
for a walk go for a drive do some
meditation and then sit silently with
the problem this is your version of
putting those ingredients for problem
solving into the oven and giving them
time to bake and you might find that the
more you practice this the more you
learn about how to improve that recipe
right so maybe you're out on a walk
thinking about this and realizing hey
I'm actually missing a bit of
information I should have read this book
before I tried to solve this problem or
maybe you're driving through your city
thinking about how you're going to solve
this problem and realizing I actually
need to give these ideas a little bit
more time to marinade just like pulling
something out of the oven and checking
to see if it's done you're going to
learn as you practice it how to optimize
this process and how much time you need
for various parts of it but the
important part is giving yourself those
ingredients and then finding a practice
that puts a little bit of pressure on
those ideas so that they bake themselves
into something that looks more like a
finished product and a lot of the time
that pressure is just the pressure of an
impending deadline right so if
something's due at 4 p.m. and you put it
in the oven at 10:00 might not have time
to cool before the deadline right so you
learn okay the next time I need to put
it in the oven the day before I need to
go do that process of active problem
solving a little bit before this project
is due but it's all about having a
process because if we don't have one
we're just eating different parts of the
batter and that's delicious but not
always the most productive so inverted
sensing so we've been don't want to in
when it comes to our work for a couple
weeks now have you guys noticed that
yeah I spend like 2 hours a day looking
up different careers on the internet
which is the exact same thing as
applying for jobs okay we'll Circle back
to that when we're in a better head
space but for now how about this I'll go
put some some towels in the dryer so
that they're nice and fluffy for when
the infp comes out of the shower and
then I'll help her prepare a healthy
smoothie put on some clean clothes and
then we'll find an excuse to leave work
midday and nap but this is the last time
that is so nice of you thank you SI I'm
here to take care of you guys inverted
sensing is the part of your brain that
checks in with your body and your
environment that keeps you aware of how
you're physically responding to the
things in your environment and that
helps you form reliable routines to
navigate the sensory world so in 2018 I
started studying neurolinguistic
programming and neurolinguistic
programming puts a huge emphasis on
figuring out what is triggering us in
our environment and when I say the word
trigger here I don't mean it like in the
sense of trauma work where something
really dramatically disregulated your
system okay I'm talking about really
really small scale triggers for example
opening up your computer and seeing 16
tabs could instantly trigger some sort
of thought that happens so quickly and
so unconsciously that you have noide
idea ever passed through your mind but
that thought may have been a judgment
about your ability to keep yourself
organized and on task and as soon as
you've made that judgment your body is
already responding to it right maybe
you're feeling dejected and full of
Shame and that shame makes you want to
go seek comfort so now you're getting
distracted and you're thinking about
what you're going to do for comfort and
this little tiny thing this tiny visual
trigger in your environment completely
changed your physiological State and
pulled your focus somewhere where you
never intended it to go and I did not
believe that tiny environmental things
made that much of a difference until I
started using NLP practices to work with
my own mind and realized oh my God these
things make a really big difference so
this one might actually be kind of fun
for you because introverted sensing is
your tertiary function as an infp and
you kind of enjoy using it and flexing
it a little bit and this is your
opportunity for you to get really really
well acquainted with what your
environmental triggers are so your
triggers can be anything you see hear
feel touch or taste so any parts of the
world that you take in through your five
senses can trigger a physiological and
mental response in you and if you want
to be more productive you have to figure
out what triggers you into an
unproductive thought pattern and what
triggers you into a productive thought
pattern and then you can optimize your
literal physical environment so that
you're being triggered more in the
direction of productivity than you are
in the direction of distraction so the
way that you do this is you first figure
out the path to productivity so all the
things that happen between you waking up
in the morning and you beginning to do
whatever kind of work it is that you're
trying to do and you physically not in
your mind do this literally with your
body in reality move through that
process so if you're someone who gets up
and commutes to work literally start in
your bed I purposely filmed this in my
bedroom because this is where my
productivity starts right at the
beginning of the day and figure out when
I wake up in the morning what do I see
what do I hear what do I smell what do I
taste what do I feel notice all of these
things and also notice what response you
have to each of them so for example I
wake up in the mornings and if my room
is messy automatically I have a
physiological response to that and I
feel scattered disordered things are out
of place I'm thinking about okay I need
to put this here and this here and oh I
can't believe I left that out I'm
already within seconds of waking up
feeling distracted judgmental towards
myself there's a feeling of stress in my
body and all of these things are already
pulling my focus away from what I want
to do that day so if I want to eliminate
this trigger I have to make sure that
before I go to bed bed each night my
room is in relatively good order and if
it isn't I have to at the least make an
appointment with myself so I know
exactly when I'm going to clean my room
so that I don't get distracted by
thoughts of it first thing in the
morning and then again I actually have
to show up to that appointment or else
this whole thing doesn't work so maybe
every day you get out of your house you
get into your car and you commute to
work and maybe you usually listen to the
radio and sometimes a song comes on that
triggers some old memory that puts you
into an emotional flashback and gets
your entire body reacting to an
emotional experience you're having that
you didn't plan or expect to have and
maybe by the time you show up to work
your mood and your entire physiological
state is actually just a response to
whatever music you listen to on the way
over but what if you could mediate that
what if you could make a certain
playlist or plan to listen to an audio
book that you knew was going to keep you
fairly regulated and fairly focused you
would be eliminating an unpredictable
environmental trigger now as soon as you
sit down at your desk what are you
seeing hearing feeling tasting and
touching some of these things are going
to be within your control and some of
them are going to be out of your control
but step one is just developing a really
deep awareness of which things in your
environment make you feel which way so I
don't know if any of you have read Marie
condo's books I actually haven't but I
have heard rumor that she might be an
infp I have no idea if that's true but I
do think that her philosophy is actually
very very infp looking at what sparks
Joy right there's something very real to
that it is using introverted sensing to
tune into your body's Sensations in
response to your Environmental stimuli
and then checking in on how is this
being processed in my introverted
feeling and that's kind of what you need
to do in order to figure out which
environmental cues are sparking
productivity and which ones are sparking
distraction so I know for myself without
a shadow of a doubt that if I wake up in
the morning and check my phone right
away instantly my productivity is going
out the window do I still do it most
mornings yeah but if I want to be
hyperproductive one day I know that not
checking my phone when I wake up is a
really good way to get myself in the
zone because I can bypass a distraction
trigger so if I have a day where it's
super important that I don't get
distracted I have to make sure my house
is clean before I go to sleep I wake up
in an uncluttered space I don't check my
phone I don't even turn on my internet
in the best case scenario I just sit
down at my desk right away and begin
writing and a kind of fun experiment to
play is to try to reverse this process
and think to yourself if I wanted to be
as distracted as humanly possible what
would I do and figure out every single
thing in your environment that you could
do to take your focus away from your
work so I would wake up and I would have
a super messy room and I would not have
figured out what I was going to wear
that morning so I would try on 25
different outfits and then I would sit
down at my computer and open up a whole
bunch of different internet tabs and I
would look at airbnbs in foreign
countries for a while and then I would
find the book that i' left half open on
my desk from the night before and I
would start reading a new chapter of the
book and then I would answer some text
messages from people and then I would
probably turn on a playlist and get
distracted by some feelings i' left
unprocessed and then I would obsess over
what I was going to eat for lunch for a
little while and by this point I would
have successfully wasted most of the
morning and all of those things are tiny
environmental triggers that I could have
avoided I could have cleaned my room
picked out what I was going to wear the
night before not put on music not open
the tabs already decided what I was
going to have for lunch and that would
have given me my entire morning back so
taking some time to just be aware of
what as many as possible of those tiny
environmental triggers are for you
allows you to design a routine for
yourself where you are bypassing as many
of the distraction triggers as possible
and where you're optimizing the
productivity triggers so a morning where
you wake up don't check your phone
already have your clothes picked out
don't listen to music that derails you
open your computer and figure out that
you already cleared all your tabs the
night before and now the only thing
that's open on your computer is the
blank Word document that you need to
start writing in okay environmental
design goes really really far when it
comes to intered sensing so why not Flex
that muscle that you enjoy flexing and
work with rather than against yourself
when it comes to designing your
environment okay the one that we are all
excited for extroverted thinking or te I
just made a rule that the infp isn't
allowed to shower until she works out
and then I turned the neuroticism volume
up on that rule to like 200% works every
time look I'm not trying to cause any
trouble I know you guys are busy I just
I organized a few agenda items that I
thought maybe we could go over together
I'm open to hearing them out great okay
so first first of all uh last week the
constructive criticism that we got from
the infp's mom look fi I know that it
was hurtful yeah but she's not wrong we
probably should be showering more than
two to three times a week okay it's like
you didn't even hear what I said so
extroverted thinking is your inferior
cognitive function as an infp which
means it's the one that you prefer to
use the least out of the four functions
that you do prefer so extroverted
thinking is never going to look the same
in you as it does isn't an ESTJ or istj
or entj or inj or any of the other types
who prefer to use it as one of their top
couple of functions but this is the
cognitive function that really likes to
put things in order to make plans and
schedules to keep you on track with your
goals and to structure your time
effectively now as an infp you might
feel like having overly rigid plans or
structuring your time too much really
impedes upon your ability to feel
creative and free and happy in life and
so I do not encourage you to overly
structure your time in fact I think that
infps put too much pressure on
themselves to do this okay so something
that I've noticed as with any inferior
function is that infps tend to overdo
their extroverted thinking when they
decide to start working with it and it's
not just I'm going to think about what
I'm going to do today it's I'm going to
plan out the next six months of my life
and I'm going to have a rigid
week-by-week schedule and I'm going to
have absolutely every project lined out
and I am never going to miss a deadline
and I'm going to work really
consistently towards this stuff and then
the moment that that motivation wains
and introverted feeling is no longer on
board the entire plan goes out the
window because the plan feels super
overwhelming so the idea here is to
avoid productivity dysmorphia okay so
avoid that fantasy where you're turning
yourself into an entj and suddenly being
nothing but productive all of the time
that will not work for you okay it's
like telling an intern who just started
at the company that they're now the CEO
that is going to be a disaster and
they're going to quit and if you try to
make extroverted thinking the CEO of
your life that is going to be a disaster
and it is going to quit so you have to
train it to fulfill the duties of being
an intern first there is a certain high
that you get from using extroverted
thinking right so the reason that you
sometimes like to plan and structure
your life so intensely is because you
get this really good feeling from doing
it but you can get that same feeling
from doing very small extroverted
thinking tasks you just have to figure
out what those are you will be
productive if it feels good to be but
the reason that you're often not
productive is because you set too big of
goals and then you don't feel the payoff
of reaching them but if you're to start
setting very small very achievable goals
then you're going to start getting that
Rush of dopamine from completing them
and then you're going to want to do more
of that and this is the process of
beginning an upward spiral right so you
don't even need to be focusing on let's
say the work task that you want to get
done in order to get the ball rolling
here you can wake up in the morning walk
into your kitchen and go I'm going to
put 10 things in in the dishwasher put
10 things in and then notice how you
feel looking around the kitchen and
seeing it be slightly cleaner than it
was 30 seconds ago that's going to give
you a little hit of that extroverted
thinking dopamine rush if you want to
get started on exercise just do 30
Jumping Jacks and then check in and see
how you feel after the important part is
to have that moment after you complete
every small task where you check in with
yourself and really anchor yourself in
that feeling of Pride accomplishment and
excitement about but what you could do
next that is that dopamine Rush that
entjs and estjs live off of you just
have to make it appropriately sized for
where extroverted thinking is in your
stacking now this doesn't mean you can't
take on very big goals it just means
that for you those goals have to be
broken way way way way way way way down
into little tiny itty bitty tasks that
you complete in tiny increments getting
that little tiny hit that keeps you
going every step of the way you're
training an intern not a CEO so again
usually when I talk to ifp types so
infps or isfps they're down on
themselves for not having big enough
goals but a lot of the time I find it's
the complete opposite they have bigger
goals than anyone else they just haven't
trained themsel to get there in tiny
little increments and that's what you
have to do in order for your te to
finally reach those overarching goals
right none of them are too big for you
it's just that you need the process and
you need to use your te in the position
that it's in in order to eventually
arrive there and this requires you
making friends with your extroverted
thinking okay don't think of it as this
monster that is trying to suck all of
the fun and creativity and joy out of
your life think of it as the banks of a
river that gives the water somewhere to
flow your fi is always going to be that
creative energetic force in your life
but if you don't give it any boundaries
to function within it can't do what it
naturally wants to do which is get into
that flow State te is just about
structuring your environment just enough
to allow your fi to get into that flow
because if your fi is distracted by
thoughts about how disorganized your
life is it's really hard to get it into
that flow right te is the thing that
allows your fi to do more of its good
work not less okay you're not supposed
to be replacing your fi with te you're
supposed to be using your te to give a
little bit of structure to the things
that don't matter as much so that your
fi can focus really intensely on what
does matter and sometimes that's just a
matter of what you're noticing so Eric
burn who spearheaded the field of
transactional analysis which if you are
ever looking for some brain candy is a
really fun field to explore you have to
take his work with a grain of salt cuz
he wrote it back in like the 60s or 70s
so it's a little on the like sexist and
homophobic side of things but if you
cannot throw the baby out with a bath
water there a lot of his ideas are super
super interesting about how humans
interact with each other and all of the
kind of subtext that's going on beneath
the surface of normal day-to-day
conversations but anyway he talks about
different needs that we have as humans
as different types of hunger so so we
have things like recognition hunger
sexual hunger contact hunger but one of
the hungers he talks about that I think
is really cool is structure hunger so he
says that all of us want to feel like
we're living a meaningful life and in
order to feel like we're living a
meaningful life we have to feel like
we're using our time in the right ways
and when we don't feel like we're using
our time in the right ways we start to
feel like we're wasting our life we're
wasting our time we're wasting our
emotional energy and we get what he
calls structure hunger so just like
literal hunger in our body alerts us to
the fact that it's time to eat some food
structure hunger that feeling of I'm
wasting my time and my life and my
emotional energy wakes us up to that
need to put some boundaries around our
time so that we can let that beautiful
deep rich sense of meaning that comes
out of our inverted feeling to flourish
and I think that NPS are almost
perpetually in a state of structure
hunger when we don't learn to structure
our time effectively because we
automatically identify that feeling as a
negative thing we just use it to make
judgments about ourselves and think oo
I'm feeling lethargic and unaccomplished
time to beat myself up but what that is
is a hunger in you it is your mind
calling you to put some loving structure
around your behavior to give yourself
more choices more opportunities to do
creative work that feels really really
meaningful for you because you've put
all of the less important stuff on
autopilot if you can learn to tune in to
your hunger for structure recognize it
when it comes up and then feed yourself
that sense of structure the same way you
would feed yourself a healthy meal
you'll find that the hunger goes away
and what takes its place is this
beautiful feeling of creative fullness
creative satiation and if there is
anything on Earth that I wish for infps
and enfps it is not a hyper rigid hyper
structured lifestyle it is a feeling of
deep personal interpersonal and creative
fulfillment and everything you do to
structure your time should always serve
the eventual end goal of getting you
there okay I think that is all that I
have have for today also quick reminder
that I do run six week soulle boot camp
virtual courses for infp personality
types I will put the link in this
description if you want to talk more
about how to optimize your cognitive
functions it is a resource that's
designed to help you do exactly that so
if that interests you you can check it
out below but also make sure that you
are dropping in the comments any
productivity tips that you have as an
infp that have helped you work better
because I think the more that we can
share and learn from each other the
better so I know that on the ENFP video
we had some really helpful comments get
left I would love to see those here as
well and as always I hope you guys are
doing awesome I love you so much and
provided I do not get another sunburn I
will see you next week
[Music]