hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel today we are talking about
depression and before I get started here
I want to make it very clear that I am
not a licensed counselor or therapist or
psychologist I am a master student
studying attachment Theory and most of
what we talk about today is going to be
drawn more from my own personal
experiences as someone who has dealt
with depression on and off for as long
as I have a recollection of being alive
on this Earth
and someone who has done a ton of just
personal reading about it trying to find
strategies and philosophies that are
helpful for me personally so the things
that we're going to be covering in this
video are not clinical mental health
advice I highly advise you to seek
professional help if you're dealing with
depression finding the right therapist
or support groups can be humongously
tremendously instrumental in navigating
difficult periods of Mental Health
I like to think less of it in terms of
mental health and more of it in terms of
kind of holistic emotional well-being I
feel like the term mental health kind of
makes something very human and very
normal very clinical
if that makes sense
um so I prefer to talk about things like
depression anxiety a lot of these kind
of common seasons of life that we go
through common
responses to living in a very distorted
Society
um
I like to think of them in terms of the
impact that they have on our emotional
body our emotional well-being rather
than using the kind of more clinical
language of mental health but all of
that is to say that this is not clinical
mental health advice this is me talking
human being to human being about the
best strategies tools and philosophies
that I have found for navigating seasons
of depression and if any of this is
helpful to any of you feel free to take
it and leave what does not work for you
we're going to start with a book
recommendation so one of the best books
I have read this year if not ever is the
book lost connections by Johann Hari I
am positive I could take an entire video
to do nothing but talk to you about this
book and how phenomenal it is if you
struggle with depression or if you know
someone who's struggling with depression
it's probably the number one book that I
recommend on depression
um because it takes an incredibly
critical and intelligent slant on how we
look at depression and how depression is
framed in our current Society in ways
that aren't always accurate and that
don't actually help people get better
from it so lost connections by Ohana
sorry an amazing read is the first thing
I'm going to recommend but what I wanted
to bring out of that book into this
video is a particular metaphor he uses
that I personally loved and that helped
click things in for me really hard which
is the metaphor of mental health
challenges like depression being like
the smoke that alerts us to a house fire
so when a house is on fire the first
thing you usually see is the smoke and
in the book he says if we were to treat
house fires based on the most visible
symptom we would treat them with fans we
would just blow away the smoke and then
the house would burn down underneath it
but because we have firefighters who
understand that smoke is a symptom of
fire they know to go in and treat the
fire and the smoke will disappear and he
uses this as a metaphor for mental
health so things like depression and
anxiety and other challenges are often
the smoke not the fire so mental health
challenges are often the signal the
symptoms that are alerting us to
something deeper that's going wrong in
our lives maybe we're lacking meaningful
connections meaningful work a sense of
purpose a sense of self-esteem a sense
of direction there are Myriad things
that could be going wrong under the
surface that things like depression and
anxiety crop up in our conscious
awareness to alert us to and I want to
combine that metaphor with another
metaphor that is in Robert Greene's 33
strategies of war and there's a section
in that book where I'm going to
paraphrase it wrong so I'm going to read
directly what I wrote down from that
book essentially what he says is the man
with Center if suddenly fire breaks out
he does the right thing immediately and
quietly he ascertains the direction of
the wind and rescues what matters
and then he contrasts this with the man
who lacks centeredness and he says this
is someone who acts haphazardly and is
unable to distinguish what is important
and essential from what is unimportant
and unessential and in this video I'm
going to be talking about using periods
of depression as that moment of pause
that will allow you to respond more
appropriately so the last thing that
most of us think of doing when a fire
breaks out is to pause and then
determine quickly what it's important to
do next most of us panic and run in the
first direction we can think of and I
also think that this is how many of us
deal with conditions like anxiety
depression or other challenges as soon
as we start feeling like something is
deeply wrong the natural response is to
panic and to run in whatever direction
we think is going to get us out of that
emotional state the most quickly and
what I want to propose in this video is
that what can actually be tremendously
helpful through seasons of depression is
if we take that moment to pause
recognize that we're seeing smoke in our
lives right we're having these emotional
issues we're having these physical
responses crop up and it's indicating to
us that there is a fire somewhere in our
lives
and if we can take that moment to pause
look at the smoke figure out which
direction it's blowing in and then
figure out what matters what we need to
take out of this fire
and which direction we need to head in
in order to make sure that the fire does
not follow us we're going to be using
our depression to our advantage rather
than simply reacting to it and ending up
in a worse place than where we started
out and the reason I want to make the
philosophy around that clear is because
for the first half of this video I'm not
going to talk whatsoever about how to
combat depression I'm actually going to
recommend tools for leaning more fully
into depression listening to what your
body and your mind and your emotional
state might be trying to communicate to
you and then in the second half of the
video we're going to talk about how to
consciously navigate out of depression
and the reason I want to make that clear
is because I know that depression can be
life-threatening it's not a silly or
trivial matter so I'm definitely not
recommending wallow or stay stuck in
your depression but what I am
recommending is stay long enough take
that moment of calm and centeredness and
be very aware of exactly what's
happening before you try to get out of
depression because when we leap too
quickly and too haphazardly out of it
we're at the highest risk for that smoke
in that fire to just follow us right
step one is figuring out which way the
wind is blowing and that is what the
first half of this video is going to be
all about so I'm going to talk about
this in terms of steps and these don't
have to be done in order you can discard
or circumnavigate or replace any steps
that don't work for you but I'm going to
talk about my process when I'm going
through a depressive episode and what I
do to help myself use that depressive
episode to eventually make my life more
enriching I'm not going to say better
because it doesn't always make me
happier it doesn't always make me more
successful or rich or whatever kind of
worldly measures of success we might be
used to associating with the term better
but it always makes my life deeper
richer more fulfilling and ultimately
more meaningfully directed when I use
this process so Step One is admitting to
yourself that you are in a depressive
episode and that doesn't have to be the
language that you use you can use the
language I am going through a difficult
season of my life you can use the
language I am experiencing a lot of loss
you can name directly what it is that
you believe is causing your depression
you can say I am feeling exceptionally
lonely right now I am lacking a purpose
in my life right now I am missing
elements of how my life used to be I am
mourning my youth I am struggling to
figure out where I belong in the world
but I think that the number one thing
that keeps depression persistent for
most people and unresolved and cropping
up again and again and again without
resolution in our lives is when we
refuse to admit what's happening to
ourselves so when we resist the
depression when we try to make our
bodies and our minds perform at their
usual level when our bodies and our
minds are not performing at their usual
level depression manifests physically it
manifests in the body it impacts our
energy levels it impacts our
concentration it impacts the way that we
show up in relationships so it has this
very large and wide reaching effect on
our lives and failing to name that and
acknowledge it is kind of like failing
to name and acknowledge having cancer
and I don't love by the way the disease
model of mental illness I think that
mental and physical illnesses are alike
in some ways and not alike in other ways
but I think that what they have in
common is their impact right when you
are physically compromised you give
yourself lenience and understanding
around the fact that you cannot do
everything you can normally do and with
depression it's no different you cannot
do everything that you can normally do
with the energy level that you normally
have and if you are chronically
resisting that what's going to happen is
that often whatever part of you is
feeling depressed is going to feel
unacknowledged and it's going to up the
ante more and more and more until you
pay attention to it at least that's how
it works for me so step one is just
naming what it is that you're feeling
now if you want to take this a step
further and I personally recommend you
do
I would challenge you to find some
legitimacy for your depressive episode
so I think that a big reason why a lot
of people struggle to acknowledge
depression in themselves is because they
feel as though they don't deserve to be
depressed right so there isn't enough
challenge in their life or they should
be happy based on all of these things
that they have that they have been told
will make them happy my personal belief
my personal philosophy is that
depression is always legitimate
it is never random it never falls out of
the sky into your brain the chemical
imbalances that it leads to are the
natural consequences of your neurons
firing over and over in a particular
pattern based on the conditions of your
life and so this isn't always easy to
figure out but if you have some sort of
gut intuition or gut feeling about what
it is that is causing your depression I
encourage you to give that thing as much
legitimacy as you can even if it doesn't
make sense on the surface so an example
of that is at points in the past that's
meant me looking at my life and going
wow I am exceptionally lonely I have so
few real-life connections right now
right I imagine that's been a common one
for a lot of people over the pandemic
and honestly in the years that followed
because I think we adjusted to a lot of
forms of digital connection that don't
give us that same kind of deep embodied
felt sense of human to human interaction
and for a lot of us that's become the
norm I think a lot more people are a lot
more lonely than they realize and that
can be a massive massive if not I would
say the number one prevailing cause of
depression right now so looking at
something like I'm lonely I am maybe
exceedingly stressed maybe I feel
purposeless whatever it is that you
think might be causing your depression
try to give that thing a name and just
try it on and see how it feels and I'm
actually going to plug lost connections
again here as a book that is really
brilliant for highlighting some of the
reasons why people tend to become
depressed that I believe in Western
Society we really don't talk about
enough so I really recommend picking up
that book if you're kind of stuck on the
why behind your depressive episode and
just trying on some of the different
ideas and seeing if anything fits if
anything feels right when you read it
but don't worry for now Step One is
enough enough just saying to yourself
I'm noticing that I am experiencing
depression is all you need to do for
step one step two put yourself under
observation and try to become as
conscious as humanly possible about
which stories you're telling yourself as
well as which real life events are
leading to which body States now this
step is an ongoing life skill that I
encourage you to develop whether or not
you are depressed and it's also very
difficult and takes a lifelong process
of honing in order to get this skill
down pat so do not panic if you can't do
this particularly well at first but what
I encourage you to do if you are
struggling with depression is become
very mindful about things like which
time of day do you feel the most
depressed versus which time of day might
you feel less depressed on average do
you wake up feeling okay most days and
then watch your mental and emotional
wellbeing being slowly decline over the
course of the day or is it sort of the
opposite so for myself the kind of
danger zone tends to be afternoon for
whatever reason and after a lot of
self-observation I've learned that if I
hit a depressive slump in the afternoon
there is nothing I can do if I am home
alone trying to do my work that will
allow me to focus my focus will
disappear my body will sink deeper and
deeper into a feeling of helplessness
and the best thing I can do is get
outside and be around people doesn't
need to be people I'm interacting with I
can go to the mall I can walk to a
coffee shop I can walk around the park
but I need to be outside and around
people in order to avoid dissociating so
that's kind of part one of this is
noticing when and in what situations you
feel more or less hopeless overwhelmed
depressed anxious whatever you want to
call it and step two is notice if there
are any particular recurring thought
patterns you have that are triggering a
body state of those feelings so there is
one period where I realized that I was
becoming incredibly anxious in my body
anytime I even thought about answering
my work email and the amount of time I
would actually spend answering my work
email was maybe an hour or two a day and
that's even including time where I would
just be like in my kitchen thinking
about how I was going to respond and it
didn't really make sense to me because
at the time I loved my job I really
liked what I did I found it interesting
and engaging and overall I cognitively
thought this is a really good addition
to my life but there was something going
on in my mind where every time I knew I
had an email to respond to you for work
my entire body would kind of tense up
and panic and I felt like I wanted to
shrink away and disappear and that was
just information to be noticed and the
longer this period went on and the
longer I continued to answer those
emails the more and more depressed I
became and again this didn't make any
conscious sense to me I really truly did
love that job but that was my body's
response and so I noted it so this is
just about gathering information on
yourself right and the information you
gather does not have to make any sense
to this day I don't know why afternoons
are my hot spot I really don't I imagine
I'll find out someday but for now I have
no idea what it is about the hours like
1 to 5 p.m that give me so much grief
when the rest of the day I have a more
natural sense of optimism when I'm
depressed so this isn't about cracking
the codes it's just about noticing what
happens when as well as which thought
patterns create which body States in you
right which obligations or tasks or
recurring Loops of thinking tend to lead
you to either a depressed down regulated
or anxious and upregulated State
all we're doing here is noticing the
patterns now step three not everyone is
going to have the ability I suppose the
privilege to do
as
expansively as I would recommend
but number three is about adjusting your
expectations for yourself during this
period
so if I were to boil this entire video
down to one sentence it would be stop
resisting depression
this does not mean let depression win
this does not mean don't get help but it
does mean stop expecting yourself to
perform at the same level when you are
depressed that you perform at when you
are not depressed this step is going to
be very difficult for anyone who has
grown up internalizing the belief that
you are as good as your accomplishments
or you are as good as the help that you
give other people or you are as good as
your ability to seem competent and
capable on the surface so for a lot of
people there's a lot of mental blocks in
the way of this step
but if you are continuously expecting
yourself to perform at the same level
that you perform at when you are not
depressed you are almost guaranteeing
yourself that your depression is going
to get worse and worse and worse during
my last really bad depressive episode I
had to accept that I was not going to be
able to work for a little while that I
was not going to be able to hand in my
school assignments on time
I had to ask for extensions on my
assignments I had to accept that I would
be living off a bit of a lower salary
for a while and I firmly believe that if
I had not made those decisions and
instead tried to force myself to perform
at a level that I was not capable of
Performing I would have absolutely
tanked everything I tried to take on we
do our best work in life when our body
state is aligned with our goals and what
we are trying to achieve so if your body
state is not aligning with your goals
you have two options right one is to try
to change your body State sometimes that
works usually when that works is when we
are not in a period of extreme mental
health difficulty right so if you're
feeling a bit lethargic one day and you
drink a coffee and give yourself a pep
talk you can probably make yourself go
to work and pull off a killer
presentation even though you woke up
feeling a little bit out of it right but
when we are in a period of depression
and our bodies are really struggling to
muster up the energy the focus the
dedication the attention that we need in
order to complete our day-to-day tasks
sometimes the solution is to ask
ourselves what tasks could I actually
just let go of right now
which ones particularly the ones that I
spend the most time struggling with
resistance to could I just accept I'm
not going to get done right now these
things can be put off or discarded until
my energy returns to me and what I would
recommend here is think about what you
noticed in step two so which activities
are causing the greatest amounts of
internal resistance and can you let some
of those go can you put strategies in
place that allow you to not deal with
them for a little bit and tell yourself
you can come back to them when you need
to afterwards this step is crucial
because now you're telling your body
State hey I notice you I take you
seriously I hear that you are trying to
tell me something I don't necessarily
understand what it is or why you are
telling me it but I'm not going to try
to change you in order to fit my life
circumstances I'm going to listen to you
step four is a natural extension of step
three which is find a way to welcome and
contain your depression now these things
are different things they're kind of the
bookends of how we take care of
ourselves through these periods so when
we welcome something into our awareness
and welcome something into our body
we're saying to it hey I see you and I
allow you to be here and some people
like to think of depression or whatever
else it is they're struggling with is
almost like a little Gremlin that you
like picture and if that helps literally
picture yourself holding your depression
your anxiety whatever it is you're
struggling with in your hand look at it
like is it a creature is it a shape is
it a cloud of fog what is it that for
you how would you visually represent
your own depression and then literally
look at that thing and go I welcome you
you are allowed to be in my body you are
allowed to be in my life I trust you're
here for a reason
and I'm going to listen to you and
integrate you and then what you need to
do to make sure that this thing does not
take you over is you need to find
strategies for containing your own
experience the difference between a
contained and an uncontained experience
is that one takes us over and we have to
struggle with the chronic anxiety of not
knowing when the feeling will end versus
when we contain our own emotional
experiences we put boundaries around the
extent to which we will engage with
those feelings so I could do a whole
video on this step I could do a video
series on self-containment when it comes
to emotions and probably will at some
point but essentially what you need to
know is that what keeps us phobic of
certain feelings and when we are phobic
of certain feelings it means we will do
almost anything to avoid feeling those
feelings that's what causes resistance
to them and what we resist persists
right so if we are terrified of going
into our own grief our own pain our own
suffering what's often going to happen
is our brains will try to do everything
to get us to not feel those things and
often depression is actually a
resistance to True suffering and true
pain like it's this kind of chronic
low-grade dull ache that prevents us
from feeling the actual losses and the
actual vulnerabilities that are
happening inside of our body and if we
want to get to that stuff and we want to
be able to process that stuff we have to
find a way to let our bodies know it's
safe to process this and there will be
an end to the feeling if I go into it
and the reason this is hard for some of
us is because we didn't always have safe
containers as children for those more
vulnerable emotions to exist within so
when we were sad as kids we may never
have had someone sit with us and really
examine and help us understand and learn
the lessons from our sadness and then
teach us what it feels like to lift
ourselves out of those States right and
so if we don't know that there will be
an end to sadness and that there can be
a point to sadness we tend to find ways
to dissociate from it instead and so how
you decide to contain your own sadness
is going to be completely dependent on
what works for you as an individual so
some tools that I like to use are when
I'm in a depressive period finding
something that I know without a shadow
of a doubt is likely to change my
physiological State and then make a
ritual of doing that thing at a
designated point in time every day so my
body begins to learn let's say at 3 pm
every day I'm gonna go for a hike and
from three to four I'm going to get my
body moving I'm going to get the
endorphins flowing and I'm going to feel
pretty good around 4 pm and if I make a
practice out of going on that hike every
day between 3 and 4 pm my body starts to
learn it's safe to feel sadder softer
more vulnerable emotions in the morning
and early afternoon because come 3 P.M I
know without a a shadow of a doubt I'm
going to feel okay again
I've created an anchor point for myself
where I know that my physiological state
is going to change and because I've done
that thing over and over and over again
my body learns to trust that that's
going to happen and so now what happens
is my body starts to realize ooh if I'm
a little bit sad one day let's try that
out and see what happens maybe from one
to two I cry a little bit and then at
three I go on the hike and I feel
different and then the next day when
sadness starts to creep into my
awareness again my body goes I remember
what happened last time my inner parent
took me on a hike at 3 pm and pulled me
out of the sadness which means now maybe
I can sit with it for a little bit
longer and then the next time a little
bit longer and then the next time a
little bit longer so we have to create
these conditions for ourselves to feel
safe going into these more vulnerable
and difficult emotional places by
creating the self-trust to know that we
will get ourselves out of them another
one I like to use is fasting so for
myself I notice that when I am hungry I
get angry which is definitely not an
uncommon correlation which is why we
invented the term hangry but sometimes
when I'm going through a period of
depression where I know that I have a
lot of anger I need to process I will
intentionally fast because I know that
the longer I fast the sharper and the
more precise my anger is going to feel
and then as soon as I eat my body is
going to relax and that is a purely
biological response because when we have
gone for a while without food our body
pumps us with cortisol and adrenaline to
try to get us to go find food and that
cortisol and adrenaline if we are not
out hunting and Gathering helps us to
feel our anger more clearly but then
once we eat our body stops over
producing that cortisol and adrenaline
that it was giving us before and so I
know if I'm fasting my anger is going to
spike and then when I eat it's going to
dissipate not entirely but fairly
substantially because now the energy in
my body is going to be redirected
towards digestion so when I'm going
through a depressive state where I know
that I need to process a lot of anger
what I will do is get in the process of
fasting and noticing and allowing an
inviting anger are into my body during
those fasted periods and really noticing
it and really following it where it
leads knowing that once I eat at the end
of this 24 hour period that anger will
lessen and knowing that it will lessen
in the future allows me to feel it more
fully and precisely and intensely in the
present right because I've created a
condition for myself that my body now
has proof of in the form of memories
that when I'm feeling that sharp hot
anger it will end there's something I
will do to physiologically change my
state right so the activity that you
choose to let's say bookend whatever
emotion it is that you are trying to do
more processing around is going to
depend on what that emotion is if you're
trying to welcome more sadness and grief
into your body you might want to pick an
upregulating activity like hiking to end
that period with if you're trying to
welcome in a very activating experience
anger or rage or even joy for some
people you might want to pick a more
down regulating activity to bookend that
with so that your body knows there will
be an end to this unusually excited
state so you have to think carefully
about how to contain your own emotional
experience here and it's going to be
very helpful in a lot of cases to talk
to a therapist a coach someone who can
help you get a sense of what it is that
maybe you're emitting from your
processing that you need to pull into
your conscious awareness a little bit
more as well as what is a safe way to
take yourself out of that because you
also don't want to trigger yourself too
much and then resort to like really bad
unhealthy coping mechanisms to change
your physical state take that from
someone who has made every mistake in
the book when it comes to this
particular step so the whole point of
step four is just allowing whatever
emotions are asking to be felt in your
body to exist in your body and also
acting as your own parent by creating an
end point where your body knows that the
state is going to be changed and I want
to emphasize one more time you can't
just like tell yourself I'm gonna go for
a hike at three your body won't be
believe you your body needs repetition
and it needs to notice what has happened
in the past before it's going to believe
you so try actually doing the thing for
several days in a row or on whatever
schedule makes sense for you before you
really expect those emotions that you're
trying to pull out to start emerging
right because your body needs to fully
know and have memories of it being safe
before it's going to be willing to go
deeper into those more vulnerable
experiences okay step five and this is
the last step in the kind of pausing and
noticing the fire phase is just notice
as much as possible the ways in which
you are out of alignment with yourself
so when I say out of alignment with
yourself I'm referring to anything that
you might look at as self-sabotage that
you might look at as your energy not
aligning with what your conscious mind
wants you to do or the ways your
conscious mind wants you to be showing
up in the world
so I will give you some examples of this
like for myself a massive sign that I'm
out of self-alignment is that I am
eating really unhealthy and I am not
exercising
so my energy is not orienting itself
towards health and vitality it's like
this part of me is just begging me to
stop to stop what I don't always know
but a really big sign for me that I'm
out of self-alignment is that I am not
feeling energized and I'm choosing
unhealthy habits another big sign for
myself that I'm out of alignment is that
I'm not feeling social whether you are
an introvert or an extrovert it does not
matter you need social interaction it is
a basic human need and often when we are
trying to hide ourselves away when we
are trying to detach from our close
relationships it can be a really big
sign that we're out of alignment with
ourselves and I want to say that neither
of these things are necessarily bad
temporary States I think there is
humongous value to withdrawing and
introspecting when that's what we need I
think there's humongous value to resting
relaxing letting ourselves eat a little
bit more unhealthy for a period if
that's what we need giving ourselves
Comfort but take note that these things
are signs they are not a new way of life
to adopt permanently when we permanently
adopt living in an unhealthy way as our
lifestyle or isolation as our lifestyle
that's when these things become problem
in their own right rather than temporary
signals that we need to listen to to get
to the core root of the problem but
these things are just that they're signs
they're signals isolation and wanting to
be alone could be a sign that we are not
happy with the ways in which we're
showing up socially maybe we don't feel
like we are being ourselves in most
social situations so if it feels like
being alone is the only time we can be
authentic and be ourselves of course
we're going to want to isolate right
maybe it feels like we are chronically
pushing ourselves and living wildly
outside of our comfort zone and so the
only comfort we find is through alcohol
or overeating or sleeping and sleeping
and sleeping right so figuring out what
these signs are that our bodies are
giving us is the entire job of figuring
out which way is the smoke blowing right
whatever it is that is showing up in my
awareness whatever self-sabotage I'm
doing whichever way in which my energy
is not aligning with what I want
consciously out of my life
is a sign that maybe that area of my
life is not what I think it is maybe
that job I had that I was chronically
experiencing distress around every time
I thought about opening an email
actually was not my perfect job maybe it
was my perfect job on the surface but my
body knows that that was not the job I
wanted to be working didn't matter how
prestigious it was how it looked on the
outside how it should have been a
perfect fit for my skills or how much
money and resource I was getting out of
it if my body was not aligned with it my
body is going to protest and I have to
listen to those protests if I want to
get out of the line of fire the protests
do not have to make conscious sense to
me I just have to notice what they are
responding to and I have to be willing
if I want this depression to lift to
listen to those signs and to trust that
they're saying something real
even if I don't want it to be true and
we experience the most resistance
between what is true and what we want to
be true right I imagine for myself all
of the times when I have felt incredible
chronic persistent resistance and
experienced incredible chronic
persistent self-sabotage it's because
there's been a giant discrepancy between
what I wish were true and what is true
so noticing where you're out of
alignment is all about noticing what is
the truth of what my body wants what I
want versus what am I trying to force
myself to want in which ways am I trying
to live that are not authentic to me and
that I am creating an incredible amount
of internal resistance around and that
is the core if you can get there of
where we can actually start healing our
lives from the inside out for from all
right so that is part one of this video
which is all about how to accept without
judgment what is happening in a
depressive episode and how to notice
what's important that you need to take
out of it step two is going to be about
actually taking the steps to get out of
a depressive episode I encourage you not
to rush this process I encourage you to
actually invite depression into your
life and tell it it can stay as long as
it wants to you will make a guest room
for it inside of your mind and you will
furnish the guest room however
depression wants and you will allow it
to stay there for as long as it would
like to be a visitor but whenever
depression comes to you and says hey I'm
ready to start moving out a little bit
looking for apartments where I can live
on my own then we are going to use all
of these strategies that we are going to
talk about now in part two of this video
to help you move forward in a more
conscious and intentional way so for
myself the key to all of this is to
think of myself as though I am a child
who has not yet learned how to
consciously navigate the world so when
you have a three four five year old
child you don't expect them to have the
moral fortitude to make all the right
decisions what you try to do for that
child is set up conditions for them in
which it's going to be as easy and
effortless for them as possible to make
the right decision so this stage only
works if you can remove moralizing from
your world view when you think about
your own actions this is incredibly
difficult to do and will take a lot of
practice and it's okay if you don't do
it well all of the time I definitely do
not do this well all of the time but
it's essentially about removing as many
shoulds as you can from your own
thinking about yourself and instead
starting to think of yourself almost
like you are a child and you are trying
to get the child to do something that
you want without applying direct
pressure so if you want your kid to be
happy you don't yell at your kid be
happy you like buy your kid a scooter
and send them outside on a sunny day and
hope for the best right and that's what
this is all about it's about designing
your own life in such a way that the
feelings you want to have motivation
concentration Joy will start
spontaneously emerging out of the
situations that you're putting yourself
in so step one of this phase is noticing
which nodes in the system are creating
the most disruption to the rest of the
system so what I want you to do at this
phase is really start to notice which
actions you might take that lead to more
actions that make you unhappy and then
we're going to work on removing just one
of those nodes so for myself when I get
depressed often there is kind of a chain
reaction that happens where insomnia is
one of my main symptoms so I will not be
able to get to sleep I'll be up at 4 or
5 a.m and then the next day I will sleep
in and then I'll wake up at that hot
spot in the afternoon where I'm already
starting to panic for some reason
because afternoons are bad for me and
then I wake up in a depressive State
stay in it most of the day and then at
night I might go okay tonight I really
need to make myself sleep so I'll have a
couple glasses of wine at night but then
I'll wake up the next morning maybe at
an earlier hour of the day but I'll be
starving and I'll go eat something
really unhealthy for breakfast because
alcohol makes me want to eat unhealthy
foods and then because I ate something
unhealthy for breakfast I'll be more
likely to make further unhealthy choices
as the day goes on and the more
unhealthy choices I make the more
lethargic I feel the more lethargic I
feel the less motivated I am the less
motivated I am the less work I get done
the less work I get done the less money
I make the less money I make the more
stressed I become so a couple of
difficult challenges lead to this giant
unfurling system of other things going
wrong right so what you want to do at
this point is figure out which small
choices that you're making are are
leading to an entire system collapse so
for myself I know that when I'm feeling
depressed alcohol is a node I need to
take out of my system and in order to
take that note out of my system I need
to find a way to go to sleep and not
have insomnia without drinking so when I
become really depressed like when I'm
down in the pits I have one goal every
single day and it is go to sleep without
drinking alcohol
and it does not matter what I have to do
to get that done usually it means I have
to exercise for about four hours a day
which is Extreme
and it is that type of extreme
commitment to removing that one hyper
problematic node from my life that
starts in upward spiral out of
depression every single time so you can
call this a hot spot you can call it a
hub you can call it a potent
dysregulating agent whatever it is your
goal at this step is to figure out which
nodes in your depressive system have the
furthest reaching tentacles towards the
rest of the system right so for me it's
alcohol it's insomnia and in some cases
it's this bizarre mid-afternoon anxiety
so I know without a shadow of a doubt I
have to do everything I can when I get
really depressed to go to sleep on time
without alcohol and you have something I
can do if I start getting really
depressed and anxious around
mid-afternoon and for me again that's
just going out and being around people
but it is going to be different for
every single person so step one is to
figure out what you need to remove that
is disrupting the rest of the system and
find a way to remove it at any cost if
the thing that disrupts the rest of your
system is sleeping until noon find a way
to stop sleeping until noon at any cost
if the thing that disrupts the rest of
your system is getting really anxious
over your partner not answering your
text messages and that throws you into
dysregulation the entire day tell
yourself I will not text my partner
period I will call them if I need
something and I will communicate that to
them but anything that is throwing your
system into chronic dysregulation and
impacting the rest of your system needs
to be stopped step two notice what is
going right and what tends to lead to
those conditions so I like to literally
use Detachment intentionally at this
point to look at myself as though I am a
child I am parenting and I'll have these
ideas of like things I want the child to
do like I want the child to eat healthy
I want the child to go on walks I want
the child to do her homework and I will
not necessarily tell myself I need to do
any of those things but anytime I catch
myself doing one of those things I stop
and I go what led to this
why is it that today I spontaneously
wanted to go for a walk when yesterday I
wanted to stay at home with all the
blinds drawn
why is it that today I wanted to make a
salad for dinner when yesterday I wanted
to order pizza
why is it that today I sat down and
started reading my textbook when every
day before this day thinking of my
textbook made me panic and we want to as
much as possible move backwards and try
to figure out what little things are
going right that we can then
intentionally recreate in order to start
motivating ourselves to make more of
those Positive Choices spontaneously a
great example of this is this afternoon
I was having my midday depression and I
decided I'm gonna get up I'm gonna go to
the mall I need to buy a few things so I
was getting ready to go to the mall and
I was listening to an audiobook while I
was getting ready and the audiobook I
was listening to gave me an idea to make
a YouTube video and so then I sat down
and started filming this video and I
noticed as I was setting up oh cool I'm
doing something that I often hope I will
do which is film a YouTube video what
led to that and what led to that was the
fact that I was putting myself in motion
I was getting ready to go out and see
people and do things and so I was
switching out of a depressive headset
and into to an action-oriented headset
and it so happened that in that
action-oriented headset I had the
thought actually I could make a video
now and go to the mall after and so
instead I sat down and did that and now
I know for future reference I am more
likely to make a video spontaneously if
I am already in motion if I'm already
thinking about getting stuff done and
going out and doing things and I'm
listening to something that's
intellectually stimulating I'm more
likely to end up doing something
productive even if it's not the thing
that I intended to do so sometimes when
something that we want to do feels like
too big of a leap just finding something
that is a similar type of energy but
that is less intimidating and repeating
that small thing over and over again
like I frequently will get up put on
makeup and do my hair and go outside and
be around people when I'm feeling my
mid-afternoon dread that action of
changing your energy and getting
yourself into Motion in some capacity
might eventually start to morph into you
getting into a more meaningful sense of
motion
but in order to figure out what things
help you get there you have to notice
when something is spontaneously going
right and then unpack what led to those
things going right the more you get in
the habit of doing this and just
noticing more of these little tricks and
tools you're going to start accumulating
because you are now reverse engineering
your own happiness and well-being
another tool I love to use for this I
advertise this journal all the time they
do not pay me or endorse me in any way
but I use this journal called the five
minute Journal where at the beginning of
every day you say what you're grateful
for and what you think would make the
day great and then you put a mantra down
but then at the end of every day you
write down three things that went well
that day so I've been doing this
consistently for a couple of years now
and I really find that the end of the
day looking at what went right is really
helpful for me as a practice using
non-judgmental self-awareness can be
really really helpful when we're in
these states where we are struggling to
get our energy to do what we think it
should I believe there is not a single
unmoted motivated person on the planet
there are only people who are fighting
their Natural Energy I believe every
single one of us from the bottom of my
heart I believe this has a natural
inborn sense of motivation and if you
believe yourself to be unmotivated the
problem is probably that you are
actually deeply out of touch with
yourself out of alignment with your own
authenticity and you don't know what it
is that you need to be tapping into to
get that sense of intrinsic motivation
flowing out of you but I fully believe
and there are very few things in this
world that I fully and holistically
believe that every single person has an
internal well of natural motivation that
if they were to tap into it would give
them all of the energy on Earth
right we just go through varying degrees
of being in and out of touch with that
thing and that doesn't even mean it's
going to be like happy excited like
manic upregulated energy right it could
just be like a very focused calm
directed awareness that's actually a lot
of what comprises motivation at the end
of the day right okay next step and this
one is extremely important this is the
first thing I'm going to ask you to do
that is not just noticing but is
actually taking concrete decisive action
you pick one thing one thing you can do
every day that feels intrinsically
meaningful to you that feels like when
you are doing this thing it is good for
your soul you are not doing it for any
greater end than the fact that it
matters to you in life and committing to
that thing as your only measure of
success every day so for myself right
now I know that when I am living in a
healthy way when I'm active and moving
my body every day and when I'm feeding
my body healthy nourishing foods it
makes every day of my life feel better
than if I have a day where I am not
doing that so every day right now the
only measure I use to judge myself on
whether or not I've had a successful day
that day is did I treat my body lovingly
and with respect and do I feel good in
my body today did I feed it healthy
foods that it wanted to eat and was
craving did I move it did I become
stronger and fitter today and if the
answer to that is yes I have succeeded
today even if I phoned it in at work I
phoned it in at school I phoned it in on
my relationships the only thing I'm
choosing to hold myself deeply
accountable to is how I feel in my body
every single day
a day where I feel good in my body is a
good day where I've succeeded and set
out to do everything I said I would do
that day and a day where I do not feel
good in my body is a day where I let
myself down and I encourage you to pick
something you love and feel intrinsic
satisfaction out of doing and go as long
a period of time as you possibly can
without letting yourself down
this is going to build self-trust it is
going to elevate your energy levels and
it is going to be you saying to yourself
I see who you really are what you really
need to be happy and I am going to
commit to giving it to you and if there
is a single thing you can do a single
thing you can do to lift yourself out of
a depressive episode I swear on my life
it is this it is looking right into your
soul noticing something that makes you
intrinsically happy motivated excited to
get out of bed in the morning and giving
that thing to yourself and making it
your only priority
if you can't make it your only priority
make it your number one priority and
routinely remind yourself that that is
your priority and this does not have to
be something that takes over your entire
life right it can be something that
takes you 10 minutes every day it can be
something that you easily bake into the
rest of your routine the point is that
this is now your standard for what a
good or a bad day is your standard for a
good or a bad day is no longer did I
complete a long list of tasks that when
I'm being honest with myself I could not
care less about on a deep level your
metric for success is did I listen to
myself and show up for myself in an
authentic way today even if it was only
for the 10 minutes that I've allocated
do that thing for 90 days in a row I'm
on day I think like 18 of my respecting
my body kick this is a tool I developed
when I was I think in my early 20s when
I decided that any time I was feeling
depressed or in a slump I would pick
something that really mattered to me and
I would do it for 90 days and I promise
you on my my life anytime I have done
this and I've actually committed to
prioritizing something I find
intrinsically meaningful for 90 days I
have always always every time ended up
in a radically different place in my
life 90 days later than where I was when
I began that's what happens when we
choose to make our true selves and our
true needs a priority
we prove to ourselves that we matter to
ourselves and that is the single best
thing you can do for your mental health
possible prove to yourself that you
matter to yourself pick a promise that
is Meaningful to make to yourself and
then keep it keep it even when you have
a good excuse not to keep it even on the
days it makes your life a little bit
more inconvenient to keep it keep it for
90 days and I promise you you will not
be in this depressed place you are in
now 90 days from now but again you have
to make sure this is something you
actually care about that feels
fulfilling to you on a deep intrinsic
level authenticity self-respect and
keeping your deep intrinsic commitments
to yourself is medicine for depression
now the reason this works is not random
it works for many reasons one it creates
lasting changes in your life two it
promotes healthy habits three it builds
self-accountability but the reason it
works that is really important and is
that depression is very often the result
of overwhelm and helplessness when we
feel disempowered and like we're not
capable of making meaningful changes in
our life depression is the natural
result of that so this step is about
reversing that feeling and proving to
ourselves in at least some small way I
do have the power to change my
circumstances I do have the power to
turn this situation around and every
time you prove that to yourself it gives
your brain a spike of dopamine and every
time your brain gets a spike of dopamine
it's motivated to take more and more
future action this step is about ending
your disempowerment and taking your
sense of autonomy and sovereignty in the
world back now step four is about
starting to reintegrate or discard of
some of the things that you have put on
hold
so as you start to feel better as this
kind of medicine starts working in your
system as you start to show yourself hey
I love and value and care about your
well-being and I will not neglect you
inner self you're going to start getting
stronger emotionally and physically and
mentally
and as you get stronger mentally
physically emotionally you will have the
opportunity to return to some of the
things that you've put on hold maybe the
projects that you haven't been working
on for a while maybe the relationships
you've been neglecting you now have the
opportunity to reevaluate do I want to
invite this thing back into my life and
if I do how can I do so without feeling
overwhelmed by it this time how can I do
so in a way that feels more natural and
more intrinsically fulfilling and
sometimes this means acknowledging I
actually can't reintegrate this thing
when I try that same panic stress
overwhelm body shutting down thing
happens and I think there are times to
figure out if we're getting triggered in
those situations and if so can we
overcome the trigger but I also think
there are things in life that are just
not for us and there is an art to
recognizing what is just not for us and
if there is a little consequence to
letting it Go just Let It Go I remember
reading in this random self-help book
when I was like 17 this line line that
said let go of the parts of your life
that you honestly don't want and I think
that when we make a practice out of
integrating the things that we
intrinsically do want we get a lot
better at noticing what we just honestly
don't want and if at this point we can
let go of as many of those things as
possible I think that is a phenomenal
win so this step is all about opening up
all of those things you shoved into a
box and said I will deal with later
because I'm making some room for my
depression this is your moment to run
back into the fire and pick only what
matters to bring out of the fire with
you
right which relationships bring you that
deep intrinsic sense of love and
fulfillment which habits and routines
bring you that sense of fulfillment
which projects which types of work bring
you that sense of fulfillment those are
the things you run back into the fire to
grab intentionally right
and to reintegrate into this new life
that you are building for yourself where
you are walking in the direction that is
going away from the smoke so as you are
consciously planning your next steps
ahead figure out what do you need to let
go of what is it actually good to let
burn down in that fire of your
depression what is it actually good to
not reintegrate versus what do you want
to take with you because you are now
noticing in a moment of calm you've
created for yourself inside of Crisis
really matters and as kind of a cheat
sheet if the thought you're having
around certain things is ooh that should
really matter because mentally and
cognitively I know it's important and
your body kind of retracts and clenches
up as you have that thought
unfortunately that might be something
you want to think about leaving behind
and if it's something that doesn't make
sense but your body expands and relaxes
and energizes itself at the thought of
reintegrating maybe that's something you
do want to think about bringing forward
with you so this step is all about
tuning into the question what matters
what matters what do I want in a way
that feels like I want to run
enthusiastically towards it with open
arms rather than just accepting it
because it's there and I feel like I
should want it and how do I fill up my
life with more of that just like we said
at the beginning we are ascertaining the
direction of the wind so that we know
how to walk away from the fire in a way
that does not have it follow us
and the way we do that is we notice
where our Depression was following us
which of those situations that we talked
about way earlier in this video are
causing the body to clench up retract
feel depressed experience brain fog
experience anxiety all of those things
are the direction of the smoke right
and if you want to start walking in the
other direction away from that fire so
it doesn't follow you you have to be
able to recognize where the smoke is not
flowing and that's what the last step is
all about which is how do you re-emerge
from this cocoon that you have created
for yourself and your own suffering and
find a pathway forward that is as
smoke-free as possible
so how do you figure out what it is that
on a deeply embodied level you truly
want to run towards you truly want to
explore and embrace even if it does not
make the sense that you want it to make
even if it is not the direction you've
been going in even if it is very
different from what you thought you
wanted out of your life how do you use
these periods of depression to let what
was inauthentic to you burn and move
forward carrying only what actually
matters to you because if you can do
that you have now leveraged one of the
most powerful tools available to you
which is your own mental health you have
listened to yourself you have integrated
what your body is telling you
and you have used that information to
actually change your life for the better
not to numb yourself out to your
feelings about your crappy life but to
actually make the literal changes that
maybe you identified yourself as needing
to make back in step one of this video
and you've set yourself on the path to
creating a new version of your life
where suffering is not a natural
byproduct of it where joy and creativity
and good healthy fear and excitement are
now your guiding principles and this
might sound idealistic and I want to
tell you that it's not because this new
life I'm proposing to you is not a
problem-free life it's not a consequence
free life it's just a life where you are
actually aligned with the problems and
consequences that you have consciously
chosen for yourself and that you are
more willing to persist with and to
fight for because they are obstacles
that you have chosen based on an
identification of what actually matters
to you so by paying all of this
attention to what was not working and
focusing so intently on what was on a
micro and a macro level you are now
going to be able to start walking away
from that fire in the direction that the
wind is not blowing and if you can do
that your depression has been a success
and not like a small success a huge
success like the kind of success that
you can look back on and go thank God
for those signals that I was not happy
thank God that I stopped and listened to
myself thank God I brought myself here
instead of continuing on the path that I
was going down because really difficult
feelings feelings of resistance and
panic and anxiety and depression are
often the natural consequences of a life
where we are not listening to attuned to
and meeting our true needs but rather a
life where we are listening to the needs
other people are telling us we must have
because we created this entire Society
based around fake consumeristic needs
that we convinced people via chronic
brainwashing we're going to make them
happy and now nobody's happy
so all of this is the process of getting
back in touch with who you actually are
and what you actually want even if it
doesn't make sense to you on a conscious
cognitive level and being willing to
trust the signals your body is sending
you enough to actually start designing
the life that you want so
this has been a very long video this
might actually be the longest video I've
ever filmed with just me talking
um and I want to once again tell you I'm
not a clinical mental health counselor I
am just a person who has dealt with so
much depression in my own life and I do
really believe I'm coming around to a
point where I'm able to drill into my
depressive episodes and find the gold
and that drilling hurts and it's hard it
is not for the weak or the faint of
heart but if you can be willing to stay
present with yourself through these
periods and take what matters out of
them I promise you you are on the path
to a sense of aliveness and purpose in
your life that absolutely no amount of
numbing out pain and sadness will ever
bring you to but doesn't help to get
help along the way so I do recommend if
you are really struggling look for a
counselor a therapist a coach someone
you can work with who can help you
figure out what directions you want to
go in there are support groups there are
books there are so many resources you
can reach for in these periods there is
no shame in getting help as frequently
and as persistently as you can get it
and I want to know in the comments what
you guys use to navigate your own period
of emotional challenge because this is
my process but it is not everybody's
process and I would love to hear what in
this video resonated did not resonate
for you guys what you're struggling with
now how you are pulling yourself out of
the struggles you're facing as always I
love all of you I hope you're taking
care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again soon
[Music]