hey guys heidi preep here today i wanted
to talk about a topic that is not
necessarily requested per se like i
don't think anyone's ever asked me
specifically to talk about this but it's
something that i see coming up a lot in
searches that when i wrote the enfp
survival guide i remember a lot of
people commented on how it was helpful
to look at mental health through the
lens of personality type
and to start us off i want to just put a
whole bunch of disclaimers out there so
disclaimer one i am not a mental health
professional at this point in my life i
am not a licensed therapist i am not
legally capable of in any capacity
diagnosing something like major
depressive disorder and in this video
that's not what i'm going to be
referencing specifically so when i use
the term depression i mean anything from
a prolonged period of depressed mood to
something that might be categorized as
major depressive disorder but i also
want to make it very clear that these
things are not type specific so being an
enfp as far as i know does not have any
bearing on whether or not you will
become depressed it doesn't have any
bearing on what that trajectory will
look like for you all this video is
meant to do is to help you gain a bit of
an awareness of some of the subtler
signs that feelings of or symptoms of
depression might be creeping up for you
as an enfp or in an enfp who you know
because any challenges that we face will
express themselves through the lens of
our type right so again having a
particular type doesn't necessarily make
you more or less prone to certain mental
illnesses but it does mean that your
experience of certain mental illnesses
might look a little bit different than
they might for someone of a different
type and last disclaimer this video is
far from comprehensive your experience
of depression or anything like it might
not look like this at all might look
completely different all this is is a
few signs to watch out for or a few
things to be aware of in terms of how
depression might manifest differently
for enfps than for other types but again
you know yourself you know your own mind
you know your mental health best if you
think that depression is something
you're struggling with highly highly
highly recommend you find a therapist or
someone you can talk to to work through
this with i have a therapist he's the
bomb everyone who has access to
one i think absolutely should take
advantage of that so please do not let
this video be your last stop if you feel
like you are experiencing symptoms of
depression but hopefully this will just
give you a little bit of information on
what it could look like in the enfp type
as opposed to any different type so in
my own life i have dealt with depression
on and off for a long time and it hasn't
always looked the way that you would
expect it to look sometimes it was the
kind of stereotypical losing motivation
no longer enjoying things i used to
enjoy but a lot of the times it was very
different it was either me overdoing
things and trying so hard to get like
that last drop of dopamine out of every
single activity in my life and then
burning myself out completely or it was
becoming hyper-regimented and actually
looking like i was a lot more organized
and on top of things than usual when
really what i was was just kind of dead
inside and almost like compliant to my
own lack of life force so it's really
important to know yourself it's really
important to know who you are when you
are firing at all cylinders and when you
do feel really excited and alive and
engaged with your life and you're not
always going to feel like that even you
know perfectly mentally sound and
healthy people don't always feel like
they're firing on all cylinders and
everything is going great in their life
all the time but it's helpful to be able
to recognize more or less where is your
energetic base okay and if this feels
like something that you don't have a
concrete answer for that's something to
work towards right working towards a
place where you feel like your life has
a mixture of really exciting and fun
opportunities but also meaningful and
growing challenges is what we should all
be doing all of the time no matter what
our mental health looks like at a given
point in time so spending some time kind
of figuring out what that looks like for
you and figuring out how you like to be
meaningfully challenged in life is
really really important to figuring out
what the way out of this woods is but
let's talk about a couple of the warning
signs you might want to watch out for as
an enfp that might indicate that there
is a little bit of depression creeping
into that worldview or a lot of it don't
want to undersell this so one kind of
danger like almost yield sign that i
would say shows up at the beginning of
periods of depression for enfps is often
this feeling of insatiability with your
own life and this is something that the
system spiral dynamics actually talks a
lot about so when we are in a state
where things have worked for us for a
little while let's say things are going
well in our lives we have a job or a
relationship or a life situation that's
been going fairly well but all of a
sudden it starts feeling like we can't
get enough of a good thing so we start
doing more and more and more kind of
overdoing whatever is working for us
really well to the point where it starts
to lose its meaning a little bit so this
could mean let's say your work starts
going really well and you get so hooked
on that dopamine hit of like yes i'm
doing really well at my work and you
just start doing more and more and more
and more and more of that same thing
trying to get that same dopamine rush
out of it and not stopping to recognize
that it's not feeling the same anymore
okay because things change relationships
change jobs change situations change and
we need to be able to adapt our own
psychology to those changes but the
problem with being an enfp is that we
aren't super aware of what's happening
in our environment in real time all the
time we kind of live in fantasyland we
spend a lot of time thinking about what
feels good or not good and being very
aware of our inner emotional states so
sometimes when certain things feel
abnormally good we will chase those
things at any expense and this isn't
always a bad thing if we're chasing
something that feels really meaningful
and growing and challenging that's
amazing and we should do whatever we can
to chase that thing but
if we are chasing things feeling like
we're not necessarily getting to where
we want to go with them we're just
trying to repeat a past high that we
experienced that might be the first sign
that we're losing touch with reality a
little bit right like we're no longer
doing this because it feels good in the
moment we're doing it because we have a
memory of it feeling good and we're
trying really desperately to recreate
that memory so for myself one of the
first warning signs that i'm kind of
going down a bad path is that i feel
like i'm spinning my wheels like i'm
doing the same thing with increasing
intensity expecting a past result but
not getting it and so i feel this
feeling of kind of like insatiability
and the problem with that feeling is
that i will prioritize trying to get
that hit get that dopamine high get that
past feeling back above everything that
is actually potentially healthy and
growing in my life right so other things
will fall apart maybe i'll stop paying
attention to my health maybe i will stop
nurturing close relationships because
i'm trying to get this high out of
whatever it was that used to give me
this high and so what happens in this
scenario is that the more and more we
chase these things to no avail the more
the rest of our life kind of falls apart
in the periphery and then it can lead to
this feeling of extreme overwhelm where
suddenly we look around and go oh my god
all of these things somehow just went to
ruin on the sidelines and now all i'm
left with is this one feeling this one
high that i'm chasing and that can lead
us to a very overwhelming place in our
lives where it feels like everything has
gone wrong everything has kind of fallen
apart and we don't know why we can't
remember how we ended up there because
at one point things were going so well
and this is also kind of the folly of
having introverted sensing as our
inferior function we don't keep a very
clear check unless we're conscious about
it of how we're managing the many moving
parts of our lives so we can get hyper
fixated on certain parts and overdo them
at the expense of our overall health and
wellness and balance because that feels
boring to maintain during periods where
something really exciting is happening
but if we allow ourselves to let our
health and balance go out the window
anytime something exciting happens we
are inevitably eventually gonna find
ourselves in this overwhelmed burned out
state where we're like wait a minute why
is nothing working anymore why are these
things that used to bring me so much joy
no longer bringing me joy and i feel
like i don't have anything else to fall
back on this is very often the kind of
situation that leads to some depressive
thoughts or feelings or a depressive
state for an enfp the realization that
we have chosen the experience or the
potential experience of joy and dopamine
highs above everything else and now our
life is in disarray and when that hits
it feels overwhelming and it hits hard
because it leads us to this place of
suddenly everything just feels kind of
off in my life like metaphorically i'm
wearing a bunch of clothes that just
don't fit right anymore but i don't know
why and the why is because we acted and
acted and acted to try to get
environmental rewards without checking
in with our introverted functions along
the way and making sure does this still
feel good am i still aligned with this
does it still make sense for me do i
feel safe and okay and secure within
this plan or is it starting to feel
uncertain in kind of a scary way all of
those questions are questions that we
ask ourselves regularly when we're in
touch with our introverted feeling in
our introverted sensing but when we are
chasing any at all costs it gets really
really hard to do that so that's just
thing number one to be aware of when you
feel like you are insatiably chasing
some sort of high in any capacity it's
probably time to take a step back and go
even if this feels good right now i'm
probably heading towards the point of
diminishing returns in this department
and that's a little warning sign in the
brain to spend some time with your
intermittent functions and make sure
that you are grounding yourself now it
might so happen that you are like me and
you don't pay a lot of attention to
warning signs and when they go off in
your brain you just kind of go no no
that's fine i've got enough emotional
and mental gas to get me through the
night and you just keep on driving and
when that happens there is the high
potential to hit a burnout point and
when enfps hit a burnout point what very
often happens is we completely and
totally seclude ourselves so we are
normally as you all know very social
very energetic people who like to do a
lot of different things bring a lot of
variety into our lives have a lot of
different interactions with people and
the moment that burnout point gets
reached it's almost like we become the
polar opposite of ourselves because we
feel so overwhelmed by all of these
emotions that we haven't been processing
for such a long period of time it can
feel like the only way to get over that
and get through that is to cut ourselves
off from anything new happening in our
lives okay because the body knows when
it's over stimulated it knows when it
has an abundance of things to process
and the natural response to needing a
lot of alone and introverted time to
work through all of the things that
we've been pushing to the side is to go
okay i'm going to limit my contact with
the outer world because if i continue to
engage with the outer world at this
speed and pace it's going to overwhelm
me completely so kind of stage two of
this process is going into shutdown mode
and becoming very reclusive now i want
to point out that this can be a healthy
thing so there can be this kind of
natural cycle that happens especially
when we're younger as enfps where we go
from doing a lot of activity and
bringing a lot of new experiences and
people into our lives and then needing a
little bit of time to kind of spend with
ourselves and catch up right that can be
a healthy thing but where it's unhealthy
is if we go into that reclusive state
but we don't actually do the emotional
processing work that needs to be done
there so if we withdraw to process our
inner world but then don't actually
engage with our inner world in a
meaningful way let's say instead we
limit our contact with the outside world
but all we do with the time that we take
is sit around and watch tv or
emotionally eat or drink or do
activities that soothe our emotions
without unpacking those emotions putting
them out on the table and going what do
i need to work through here if we can do
the second thing then we are setting
ourselves up for a very healthy re-entry
into the world right we have taken
meaningful alone time which is something
that we need but if we're doing the
first thing and even within our alone
time we are avoiding ourselves and
avoiding that inner world all of the
stress and confusion that we felt during
that period of spinning our wheels and
being out in the world trying to do more
and more and more but not getting the
result we wanted is still gonna be
present in our psyches it's just gonna
be present in a different way so now
we're gonna feel a lot more withdrawn we
might feel kind of helpless and like we
don't know where to go next and again
these are warning signs of your inner
world needing to do some processing and
again if you can't do this on your own
if you're really struggling to do this
on your own i recommend finding a
professional or someone who can help you
process those feelings because sometimes
we actually don't have the skills for
processing our feelings that we need
right and that's what attachment is all
about like some of us missed really
important phases of development where
you learn to self-soothe to observe your
inner world to deal with your own
problems and find meaningful solutions
to them and there is no shame at all in
needing some help with that i need help
with that and it's pretty cool that we
invented the field of mental health so
that help is available to people and if
you can't afford therapy which is a very
big problem that a lot of people have i
really recommend going and picking up
some books from the library that have
been written by therapists finding as
many online resources as you can there
are really awesome youtube channels that
are run by mental health professionals
there's a lot of really good accessible
free info out there that might help you
gain a little bit of perspective on what
you're feeling and what you need to
process and how to do it in a safe way
because it's hard man like our inner
worlds are complex places it would be
wild if you just knew the road map off
the top of your head okay we have to
learn that we have to learn like which
trains of thought lead us into a dark
scary forest and which are bringing us
towards like a warm bubbling brook next
to a mountain okay that is not the stuff
that we all know off the bat so it helps
to have help or it helps to just spend
some time in there and literally learn
the landscape of your own mind in a
non-critical and non-judgmental way and
that's something that the field of
mindfulness can help a lot with and
there are a ton of great resources on
the internet about that so this is a
stage if you have hit this kind of wall
as an enfp of burnout where you have the
opportunity to get to know the inside of
your mind in a better and more
meaningful way so that when you return
to the world you can do it in a way that
feels more meaningful and more engaged
and more filled with opportunity than it
may have ever felt in the past right but
until we realign with ourselves and what
our inner selves actually want in the
world it's going gonna be really really
hard to do that so the third kind of
stage if you will if stage number two
does not work out for you so let's say
you do not find a way to process your
inner world and re-enter the external
world with a strengthened sense of self
is that i've noticed a lot of enfps and
infps tend to at this point ruminate
really heavily over either the past or
the future or both but very rarely at
this stage are we in any way in any
capacity engaging with the present
moment and the actual events of our
lives instead we're spending a lot of
time in our own heads either trying
obsessively to figure out what one thing
went wrong in the past that we've
decided is kind of the downfall of
everything that happened afterwards or
trying to structure and rigidly
implement a very specific future for
ourselves that is completely unrealistic
because the future is out of our control
and yes you can have plans for the
future and that's a wonderful thing and
i would never tell an enfp not to plan
for the future i'd never tell anyone not
to plan for the future but there is a
difference between having plans for the
future and also having a healthy ability
to let go of control and go you know
what whatever happens happens i'm going
to try to steer things in this direction
but i'm going to be open to whatever
comes up along the way
versus looking at the future as
something that you absolutely must
control every aspect of in order for
things to turn out okay and this is a
tendency that i see with people who have
inferior si when they are in a depressed
state as you know we're gathered here
today because ne fi have completely
driven our life off the rails for the uh
seventh time this year who's counting
though really i mean that's just you're
being a bummer there's no need to be a
bummer
they think that anything that happens in
the future has to happen a very specific
way because they believe that the past
happened the way it did because of a
very specific sequence of events that
they've decided was in control of these
much larger things unfolding and
something that's hard to remember for
any type that doesn't have a good grasp
on essie is that nothing in the world is
caused by one thing okay your life is an
incredibly dynamic thing that is
constantly unfolding a million different
factors are coming in and out of any
singular decision any singular
trajectory any single course that we set
ourselves on there is never one thing
that ruins it all there is never one
specific thing you say or thing you do
or mistake you make that ends you up in
a specific place if anything it is this
dynamic interaction between the events
of our lives and our inner world and how
we're processing those events and how we
are assigning meaning to them that end
us up where we do and both of those
things need to be engaged with in a
healthy and realistic way if we want to
build a healthy future and if anyone is
guilty of not accepting that it is me
when i get to this point in my own life
i create very elaborate very specific
futures for myself where i even kind of
plan like in what way i'm going to be
out of control if that makes sense but i
am not planning for a realistic life in
these scenarios in the way that things
actually tend to happen in real life
because real life does not have these
like sweeping redemption arcs right and
it's so tempting to want that and to
feel like if only i can create this
redemption arc for myself in my life
then everything will be okay again and
this is the antithesis of getting better
because actually getting better from the
difficult events of our lives means
becoming very realistic about what got
us into those situations and it was
often
myriad things that led to a place in our
life where we weren't doing so well and
also being realistic about what it's
going to take to change those things and
to get ourselves to a better place and
it's probably not going to be this
dramatic sweeping story that is super
inspirational to tell 20 years from now
you know it might be maybe in retrospect
we'll be able to spin it that way but
while it's happening it's more
realistically going to feel like a
series of small steps in different
directions that bring us closer to the
kind of person we want to be and the
kind of life that we want to be living
okay so at this point it's really
important even though it might feel like
the only thing you have left to give up
on grandiose visions of the future right
okay loosen the grip a little bit on
that fantasy that the way in which we
return to the world is going to be
extremely dramatic and perfect right
that it's going to feel incredible all
of the time that's not how actual change
in actual progress works actual progress
and change requires humility and a lot
of it and the willingness to work very
slowly and steadily
towards the places that we want to get
to next and this is something that um in
the book how we change and 10 reasons
why we don't by ross ellenhorn he talks
a lot about he talks about how to stay
in the humility zone and how to not kind
of dissociate into a place where you've
already gotten better and already
changed your whole life and then just
get repeatedly frustrated by the fact
that you aren't there yet right we have
to be willing to take all of those tiny
steps along the way and there's a quote
he has in there that something along the
lines of like every step that we take
towards a different life is vital
terrain in and of itself it's not just
about arriving there and everything
being better the steps that we take are
just as important as that final step to
the summit okay because there really is
no summit life is not a giant mountain
we climb it's just peaks and valleys man
and every single step that we take in
any direction really matters so try not
to dissociate from the climb while
you're climbing a mountain because guess
what not going to feel so good when you
get to the top if the entire way there
you were ignoring all of the potential
for really meaningful and growing things
to happen along the way and it should
also probably be noted that during these
periods when we are hyper fixated on
both past events and future events the
way that we tend to be dealing with the
present and with our physical
environments in the present is that we
tend to become hyper rigid about
organization in our environments because
everything feels so out of control so we
want to control absolutely everything we
can for me this has looked like
excessive cleaning like making sure my
space is incredibly perfectly maintained
and obviously there is a healthy version
of this right like i'm coming up on 30.
i have finally learned to make my bed
most days and to clean up the kitchen
after i cook most nights but there's a
difference between being fairly
structured and organized but letting
like 20 percent of stuff go versus not
being able to let anything go and
needing everything to be hyper organized
hyper rigid hyper structured for every
moment of your time to be accounted for
for there to be no ambiguity in your
external environment whatsoever or else
you start panicking is generally not a
trait of stable mental health in the
enfp okay when we are at our best we
know what matters and what we can let go
of but when we're really struggling
every little thing in our environment
can feel very very important and very
anxiety inducing if we're not attending
to it in the perfect way so that can be
a really big thing to watch out for in
your own mental health and naomi quank i
never know if i'm saying her last name
correctly but she talks a lot about this
in her book was that really me where she
talks about what happens when our
inferior function kind of comes out with
a vengeance when we're not coping so
well in terms of our mental health next
order of business we were recently
informed by our primary care physician
that if we don't start getting a full
eight hours of sleep a night and
exercising on a regular basis we're
likely to experience a complete nervous
breakdown
again
so i'm gonna implement three exercise
breaks throughout the day that i
personally plan to become very panicked
about if we miss even one time well
that's not necessary we could actually
skip a few workouts and it would be
completely fine from a health
perspective as long as it ends up
balancing out who's in charge here te is
it you did you stop the business from
failing
no
three exercise breaks a day 9 am 12 pm 5
pm on the hour no more caffeine or sugar
period we're working a desk job and i
intend to do everything i can to keep us
there for the next 40 years any
objections and i've talked about
versions of this in other videos i
believe we go over this in the enfp and
infp soul bootcamps as well but there
can also be this tendency to just
completely dissociate into fantasyland
and to refuse to live in actual reality
right to want our will through
extroverted intuition and introverted
feeling to override reality so that we
are the sole authors of our lives that
we are not letting anything or anyone
else affect us in any way and that is
not a healthy or a particularly happy
way to live right when we are refusing
to be affected by anything when we are
trying to make absolutely everything go
our way down to the things that other
people say to us and the relationships
that we have with other people we are
closing ourselves off from the most
important parts of being alive right
which is dynamically interacting with
the world around us with the people in
that world and allowing ourselves to be
changed and be influenced and grow in
different directions right if we are
trying to hyper control everything it's
going to lead us to this place where our
world is so small and where there are so
few meaningful directions for us to turn
to in life because we have cut off our
life force and our life force is this
big responsive thing that lets other
things in that allows us to interact
with the world in an open-ended way and
when you are functioning from a place of
robust and strong mental health as an
enfp that life force is an incredible
thing it is magnetic to the people
around you right and this is not to say
that you always need to be living right
in the middle of that but it's important
to remember when you get to these places
when you get to that spot in your life
where you are trying to hyper control
every little thing and plan the future
so that it goes exactly the way you want
it to go you have lost your life force
in those moments right you have lost the
thing that could and will restore you to
sanity if you can find a way to
reconnect with it and that requires
creating a situation for yourself where
you feel emotionally safe enough to
explore again because when we cut
ourselves off as enfps when we enter
into those more depressive periods it is
99 of the time because we don't feel
safe enough to explore so we've cut
ourselves off from that part of our
lives and restoring ourselves to that
place of psychological and physical
safety is often a lot of work and it's
something that a lot of us could use
help with so again i'm going to
emphasize if at this point you realize
that this is kind of where you are that
you have gone through a lot of these
stages that you have shut down quite a
bit that you are really struggling to
feel like you can dynamically interact
with your life in a safe way you
probably could benefit from getting some
professional help again no shame in
doing this my therapist is like the best
person i've ever met in my life love
going to therapy which i would never
have said even a year ago like it took
me 29 years to finally get on board with
the whole therapy thing and god damn it
do i ever wish i had done it sooner but
also if you're not there yet there are
books there are youtube channels there
are online resources that you can check
out that can be really really helpful
for also helping you understand your
inner landscape and get a better idea of
which route is going to take you kind of
out of this woods even if it's slow even
if it takes a long time even if it is
not as impressive or as inspiring as you
want it to be
often the things that truly make us
better in the long term aren't that sexy
like they're just about learning to be
more stable with ourselves give
ourselves a safe and secure base in our
own lives to go explore from and that
takes time and it takes work but it's a
lot better than the alternative right
which is going through these endless
cycles of insatiability and then
complete and total collapse and
reclusion and obsessiveness and then
repeat right i did that most of my life
i know how tempting it is but it is not
the healthiest way to live and it gets
old real fast right it can feel more
sustainable when you're younger and a
lot of people are living in kind of
starts and stops but the older you get
the more difficult it feels to maintain
that kind of lifestyle and it just stops
you from getting the most out of your
life so i think i'm going to stop this
here for today there's a lot more that i
could say on the topic of enfps and
mental health and different ways in
which your mental health might manifest
through the lens of your cognitive
functions but again i just want to
emphasize that my experience is not
going to be every enfps experience for
you depression might show up in a
completely different way you know
yourself and your own mind best so
listen to your own intuition here when
you feel like something is off even if
it doesn't mirror any of the
stereotypical traits of depression or of
depression through the lens of your
personality type at the point in my life
when i was the most depressed i was also
the most high achieving i've ever been
right so there can be a lot of different
faces to our mental health challenges
and it's important to stay tuned into
yourself and your inner wisdom and your
own inner guidance because that is what
is ultimately what's going to give you
the kind of temperature check on your
mental health on your emotions and on
the periods in which you kind of know
you need a little bit of help or a
little bit of restructuring to get
through this be gentle with yourself if
this is a period that you're going
through there is absolutely another side
to it there always has been there always
will be you just need to learn to love
yourself in a true actionable way enough
to carry yourself through to that other
side and there's a lot of help out there
for you if that's what you need all
right i love you guys i will see you
back here soon i do have a website
www.heidiprebe.com
where i sell enfp and infp soul boot
camp programs again want to meet the
caveat they are not mental health based
so if you are looking specifically for
help with depression or other mental
health issues these boot camps are not
therapy therapy-based models they are
coaching based models so it is a
slightly different approach i do
recommend that you look for a therapist
or counselor if anything that i talked
about in this video is something that
you feel like you need some help with
but if you're just looking to invest in
your future in a kind of fun and
exciting way the enfp bootcamp is
designed to give you a bit of a kick in
the butt in that direction alright love
you guys and i will see you again back
here soon
[Music]
you