hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today we are going to be
talking about the fearful avoidant
attachment style and why this style can
have a particular level of difficulty
when it comes to moving on from or
gaining closure around past romantic
relationships now all attachment styles
are going to have their own unique
challenges when it comes to that moving
on and closure gaining process but today
we're going to really hone in on what it
is for the fearful avoidance style that
can make it so difficult to find that
closure and feel comfortable and settled
moving into the next stage of their
relationship life so we're going to go
over five specific difficulties that
fearful avoidance tend to experience in
this department and then we're also
going to briefly go over some of the
antidotes or some of the possible Roots
out of those difficult thought and
behavior patterns so without any further
Ado we will get right into reason number
one
first reason why those with fearful
avoidant attachment Styles tend to
struggle when it comes to moving on from
romantic relationships is because they
do not experience intimacy easily or
regularly so to have a fearful avoidant
attachment style means that generally
you have a deep connection to your own
emotional experience and just in general
your self-concept however you can really
struggle with opening up and showing
those more vulnerable parts of yourself
to other people now this is distinct
from those who are let's say more
dismissive avoidant who don't
necessarily have that same strong
emotional self-connection right they
tend to be very tuned into their own
thoughts and actions and goals but
there's not always that same sense of
this is who I am on a very deep felt
level and those using anxious attachment
strategies do tend to have a strong
sense of their emotional experience
however they don't necessarily
experience the same difficulty that
fearful avoidance have when it comes to
sharing their emotional experience
because they have that your okay
worldview they tend to believe that
other people are capable of
understanding them emotionally and so
they're more likely to share themselves
with others and form close relationships
with others more regularly now with the
fearful avoidance you have that
connection to the self and often you
have someone who has very deeply
analyzed and gotten to know themselves
and yet because the fearful avoidant has
the I'm not okay but also you're not
okay worldview they tend to share the
dismissive avoidance belief that other
people are probably on average not
either smart enough or caring enough or
capable of in some capacity
understanding them so they're going to
be very slow to open up to Partners in a
real intimate way fearful avoidance can
be very warm on the surface and they
might even seem as though they're
speaking at length about their emotions
but if you're really paying attention in
the initial stages fearful avoidance are
generally not share during the really
vulnerable stuff they're sharing the
stuff that they've already kind of
processed and found a way to contain to
get to that really vulnerable stuff with
a partner it takes a very long time for
most people with a fearful avoidant
attachment style so when they finally
get to that place and open up to a
person if they then lose that person it
can feel like a tremendous loss because
they don't have that many people who
they have ever shown themselves to that
deeply and they're likely to know either
consciously or unconsciously that it's
going to take them a very long time to
get to that place again with somebody
else so you might have this Desire with
the fearful avoidance to cling to a
relationship even after you know it's
gone bad simply because you feel as
though you won't find that sense of
intimacy and understanding anywhere else
or even if you do it's going to take you
like five years and the process of
opening up and letting someone see your
vulnerabilities and get to know you in
that way is something that you generally
find pretty uncomfortable and pretty
daunting and so losing a romantic
partner who you have opened yourself up
to and truly been vulnerable with is
kind of a triple whammy of processing
the loss having nowhere else to turn if
you don't have any friends or family
members who you have true deep
vulnerable connections with and having
to experience the dread of knowing that
you're gonna have to do it all over
again if it's a process that you really
loathe so the first reason why fearful
avoidance can struggle to move on on
romantic relationships is because a lot
of them don't really open up to anyone
until they get really deep into a
romantic partnership and then there is a
lot resting on that Partnership if
that's the person they're going to with
most of their more vulnerable needs
they're losing a lot when they're losing
a relationship like that as opposed to
let's say a securely attached person who
might have a very deep and intimate
connection with their partner but who
probably also has deep emotionally
intimate connections with their friends
or their family members and who have a
wide network of support that they can
turn to when things are not going well
in their partnership so while it would
still count as a humongous loss for a
secure person to lose their partner it
would not be the loss of their only
resource when it comes to True deep
vulnerable intimate connection reason
number two why those with fearful
avoidant attachment Styles can really
struggle to move on from romantic
relationships is because and in my
opinion this is the most overlooked one
fearful avoidance are probably more
likely than any other attachment style
to leave a relationship while they are
still in love with the person why would
this happen a core part of the fearful
style is that sense of enmeshment and
not knowing how or when or where to draw
boundaries in relationships so when you
have someone with a fearful avoidance
style there is a very high likelihood
that when something happens in the
relationship that they don't like
they're not necessarily going to be
aware of it in the moment and able to
set the appropriate boundaries they are
more likely to get disoriented not know
what it's fair to ask for which
boundaries it's fair to set they might
start an impulsive fight over something
and then the next day decide oh my God I
made a huge mistake actually the whole
problem was me and then go Fawn and take
complete responsibility there is a large
pervasive sense of disorientation within
this style about what boundaries it's
okay to have and what it's okay to ask
for in a relationship so this
disorientation well it is absolutely not
intentional and not something anyone
would choose does tend to lead to quite
a bit of conflict that doesn't
necessarily get resolved in a way that
prevents it from happening again it's
also worth noting that fearful avoidance
do not tend to date secure people they
tend to date other insecurely attached
people so it's likely that in these
relationships there's a lot of
unintentional conflict and Chaos that it
isn't necessarily getting resolved and
eventually this might reach a breaking
point where either the person with the
fearful avoidant attachment style or
their partner kind of throws up their
hands and goes that's it I'm out I
cannot take this anymore it's too
stressful it's too chaotic I need to get
out even if I still have a lot of love
for the person I am with and I think
this is something that fearful avoidance
tend to not acknowledge enough and give
themselves enough emotional credit for
the fact that they are not just going
back and forth because they can't make
up their minds a lot of the time it's
because they leave while they are still
in love
contrast this with someone who has a
more secure style they are likely to
deal with small conflicts as they come
up set boundaries wherever it's
appropriate to and so if they are
choosing to leave a relationship it's
probably because their feelings have
genuinely changed Ergo we have all these
Norms around people leaving
relationships when they no longer have
feelings so then if you have a fearful
style you leave a relationship and you
still have feelings for the person
you're probably going to feel like what
is wrong with me like why is it so much
easier for other people to move on when
I am still stuck missing this person who
I wanted to break up with well chances
are it's easier for a lot of other
people to move on because they were
probably already on the way to falling
out of love if not mostly fallen out of
love when they left the relationship and
for you that might not be the case most
of the time because you have these
additional challenges to deal with by
virtue of your attachment system and
that might just be something to give
yourself some Grace around right if you
took a secure person out of the middle
of a relationship while they were very
in love and very connected to their
partner they would also experience
distress and regret and a desire to
reach out and get back in touch with
that person those are normal feelings to
have when you are in love with someone
it's just very unfortunate and very
difficult when you're tasked with
leaving a relationship well the love is
still there because the level of
dysfunction is so high and this is
something you might want to consider
lending yourself a lot of compassion
around reason number three why those
with fearful avoidant attachment Styles
tend to struggle to move on from
romantic relationships is because the
point at which they are likely to exit a
relationship is a point at which they
are deactivated so when you are fearful
avoidant you have two different types of
attachment responses that come online
for you in different situations one is
the hyper activated response that is
characteristic of the anxious attachment
style so when your attachment system is
hyperact activated you are scanning for
threats you are focused on your
partner's Behavior you are trying to
increase your proximity to them detect
any deception that might be happening
and generally make sure that you are
staying close to that person
when your attachment system is
deactivated you are experiencing a
conscious disconnect from the emotions
that are relevant to your attachment
relationships so if you are angry if you
are upset you might suddenly have
trouble consciously becoming aware of
any of those feelings and instead you
might feel a sense of pressure when you
think of your attachment relationship
and all of those other feelings might
suddenly feel inexplicably difficult for
you to access sometimes for a very long
period of time now during periods of
deactivation so when something happens
that triggers you into a deactivated
state in your attachment system you are
more likely to see the relationship as a
pressure and a burden and struggle to
feel connected to anything that is
positive within it or to your more
intimate and vulnerable feelings towards
your partner and so it logically follows
that you are most likely to exit a
relationship at a point in which you are
in a deactivated State the problem is
that unlike let's say the dismissive
avoidant who spends a great deal of
their time in a deactivated State when
it comes to their attachment
relationships you tend to Ricochet back
and forth between deactivation and
Activation so you might leave a
relationship and feel very calm about it
feel quite certain and settled that you
made the right decision then as soon as
you back away the pressure gets taken
off and you have some time to be alone
and re-regulate yourself your system is
going to start coming back online and
all of those feelings that you felt
towards your partner might suddenly
arrive back to you very unexpectedly
sometimes months after you broke up with
them I like to liken this to the
experience of standing too close to a
bonfire when you are really close to it
it starts to feel unbearably hot and so
what you naturally want to do is back
away and when you back away you get that
Rush of cool air in and you feel an
intense sense of relief and like you
have done the right thing but then you
stand there for too long and you start
to get cold again and you start noticing
that you want to move back in and this
is a very natural cycle that the fearful
avoidant tends to go through when they
are not aware of their own patterning
they get too close to the fire they
don't know how to set boundaries ask for
what they want address the things that
aren't working in a relationship in a
consistent way and So eventually it
starts to feel like my only option is to
back off get out of the relationship and
as soon as that decision is made it
might feel like a relief but then after
some time those warm memories start
returning to you and you start realizing
I'm kind of cold out here and later on
in this video we're going to talk about
how to emotionally regulate your own
temperature so to speak so that this
cycle doesn't have to keep happening
reason number four why people with
fearful avoidant attachment Styles can
struggle with moving on from romantic
relationships is that they tend to
really struggle when it comes to working
out who was responsible for what so to
have an insecure attachment style
whether that is avoidant fearful
avoidant or anxious means that you
fairly consistently distort information
and use a lot of Storytelling to
navigate your romantic relationships so
if you are more anxious you tend to do a
lot of idealizing of your partners which
can very quickly shift into you telling
yourself a villain and victim story
particularly when your relationship ends
and if you are on the dismissive
avoidance side of things you're doing a
lot of distorting of your emotional
experience when a relationship ends
you're more likely to reflect on okay
what sequence of events happened here
what led to what and how can I make sure
in the future I'm not repeating the same
type of pattern and if you're a secure
you integrate both how you felt about
the relationship as well as what led to
what within the relationship so you can
walk away with a balanced view of things
if you are fearful avoidant you have
access to both the distorted information
of the anxious side of the attachment
spectrum and the distorted emotional
experience of being on the avoidant side
of the attachment Spectrum however you
cannot access them both at once in an
Integra braided way here go you tend to
find yourself ricocheting between the
stories that you tell yourself about the
relationship so one day looking back on
the relationship you might be a little
bit more in that anxious mindset and you
might go well I have pure intentions I
did everything for that other person I
gave and gave and gave and they didn't
give me enough back Ergo I was the
victim in that situation and it was the
right choice to leave though I should
have given them more of a piece of my
mind on the way out and then the next
day you can wake up and look at things
from the complete opposite perspective
and go wait a minute I did X Y and Z and
that's what led to this Ergo the entire
relationship and everything that went
wrong within it was my fault now I just
need to go back and make amends and
apologize and it can be this back and
forth ricocheting that leaves you
feeling absolutely helpless to figure
out what happened so you might have 10
different narratives about the
relationship on 10 consecutive days
because you aren't really grounded in
your aware awareness of true information
and true emotion like the secure person
is so this is kind of like imagine you
are trying to solve a crime and every
day you get a piece of new evidence that
directly contradicts the evidence you
got the day before you will be madly
constantly reevaluating that case File
and it will be very difficult to ever
reach a conclusion Until You Learn
Somehow to integrate all of the pieces
of evidence into a greater whole which
is what happens when the fearful
avoidance starts healing their
attachment system however that takes
quite a bit of time and in the meantime
this sense of ricocheting back and forth
between whose fault was what can be very
preoccupying and very distressing for
the fearful avoidant who either has
recently left or is thinking about
leaving their romantic relationship it's
like they don't have a consistent drawer
they can put their emotions about that
relationship in so they're constantly
opening drawers and trying to move it
around and that gets really exhausting
and the fifth reason we're going to talk
about today why fearful avoidance tend
to struggle to move one from romantic
relationships is because they don't have
a great deal of access to True pain and
this is actually true of all insecurely
attached Styles what insecure attachment
responses are are a barrier between
ourselves and the pain of loss that is
by definition what an insecure
attachment response is true emotional
pain means having a true understanding
of what happened and the ability to be
present with our emotional response to
what happened
true pain is the vehicle that moves us
through loss if we are distorting either
the facts about what happened or our
feelings about what happened it is very
difficult to access our true emotion
about it and in the case of the fearful
avoidant you are distorting both of
those things as a product of your
attachment style now this was once very
adaptive when you were young you needed
all of those defenses to keep you away
from the pain that would have been
psychologically intolerable for you at
that point in time
however as an adult it's often more
adaptive to start to gain access to our
true felt emotions so we're going to
talk about what that looks like in the
next portion of this video in order to
access your true emotional experience
you have to be oriented to reality and
you have to be in touch enough with your
body and emotional state to stay
consistently aware of what you have lost
and how you feel about it the problem is
that to be fearful avoidant means to be
in a state of Fairly consistent
disorientation when your attachment
system gets triggered so you don't
really know what weighs up and what
weighs down when it comes to your
emotional experience which keeps you
away from spending a lot of time in that
place of deep grief and pain now in the
next part of this video we're going to
quickly go over and just give a little
bit of a starting place or a jumping off
point for where you can start to work on
each of these problems in order to make
the moving on process start to feel a
little bit more natural for you so
problem number one the problem of not
having a lot of intimate connection now
to work with this problem we need to
make the experience of ourselves being
known feel less rare famous quote that's
commonly attributed to Buddha you only
lose what you cling to when we only
invest ourselves really deeply and allow
our vulnerabilities to be seen by a
select few people now we have a lot of
pressure resting on each of those
relationships
in order to relieve some of that
pressure and not have to grip so tightly
to those relationships we have to allow
ourselves the opportunity to be known
deeply by more people obviously if you
are fearful avoidant there are barriers
in the way of this that are not there
for let's say secure people you are more
likely to have a trauma history you are
more likely to struggle to share
yourself openly you are more likely to
not know where to go to find people who
are like you and could understand you
and so this is going to be a process
that takes time patience and intention
it's probably going to involve a lot of
Shame work so finding a way to convince
yourself that it is okay to let yourself
be seen by the right people under the
right circumstances and then developing
the communication skills to share more
about yourself in a contained way
so again this is a very long process but
that's the first takeaway in order to
let go of that frantic sense of grasping
towards the relationships that are deep
and intimate you need to work on
building the skills to develop more of
those relationships so that all of that
pressure isn't resting on your
relationship with your romantic partner
alone problem number two leaving while
you are in love we already kind of
touched on this but what you need to do
here is develop an awareness of where
you need to have boundaries well you are
still in the relationship so instead of
letting anger or sadness or
vulnerability pile up until you can't
take it anymore and then just cutting
ties with the entire relationship you're
going to need to learn to slow down and
address those problems one by one as
they are happening
this means giving yourself permission to
have boundaries and that might be a
really difficult thing for you to do if
you come from a very enmeshed background
so you can justify this by telling
yourself these boundaries actually serve
the health of the relationship if I give
myself permission to ask for space or
whatever it is when I need it I am
giving my relationship a long-term
Fighting Chance at success so doing the
painful and uncomfortable thing up front
over and over again is going to give you
the best possible chance at not getting
overwhelmed and having to leave the
relationship very abruptly while you are
still in love with that person and
here's what's really cool about this if
you learn to communicate your needs and
what isn't working for you in a clear
direct and compassionate way
and your partner is consistently
uninterested in working with you on that
it's likely that's going to change the
way that you feel about your partner
over time
so by exposing the issues in the
relationship to oxygen giving yourself
and your partner the opportunity to
address them head on and seeing what
happens is going to give you a lot of
information that your emotional system
is now going to log so if you do end up
walking away from the relationship
because you aren't able to draw
boundaries or address issues as they
come up at least you can walk away not
wondering what if I had addressed those
things what if I had brought them up
what if I had made my needs clear
you know what happened and so you can
walk away like a secure person at the
point when your feelings have actually
changed because you gave it a good
honest shot and you saw what happened
now this bleeds into the antidote for
problem number three which is that
problem of leaving when you're in a
deactivated State and then having your
feelings return unexpectedly to you at a
later point in time working with this
requires developing an awareness of what
happens that triggers you into a
deactivated State when you are feeling
close connected to excited about your
relationship with someone and then all
of a sudden it's like a flip switches
and you can't find the part of yourself
that liked or felt attracted to them
that does not happen out of nowhere your
attachment patterning and your avoidant
defenses are not random something
happens that switches you into that mode
and if you can learn to trace your
patterns backwards stop gaslighting
yourself and just telling yourself oh I
just have have attachment issues and
that's why all my relationships get
ruined that's not untrue in the sense of
yes your attachment responses are coming
online however they're not coming online
out of nowhere there is some inciting
incident that is triggering you into
deactivation if you can figure out what
that is put down any judgments you have
around the fact that you had that
response as a consequence of whatever
happened and actually figure out what
you needed in that moment that you
didn't have that triggered you into
deactivation you can start addressing
those moments as they come up in the
relationship and showing up for yourself
and asking for what you need in order to
lessen the likelihood that you're going
to become overwhelmed altogether and
start feeling as though the relationship
overall is not something that you want
so very often what happens here and I
will have a video coming out in the next
month that addresses this more
specifically is there will be a sense of
disgust that come online it can feel
like I want no part of this relationship
whatsoever I feel 100 sure of it and all
of a sudden the strong feelings that you
previously had seem to have evaporated
now if you can start to look at your own
disgust response as your body saying
there is something here that I am
telling you no to take that seriously
ask yourself what is wrong in this
moment in my relationship that is giving
me this feeling of disgust and how can I
address it in a way that is respectful
of both myself and the other so this
means reeling ourselves back in from the
Productions it's not you are disgusting
it's hey I'm noticing I'm having some
sort of negative response to something
that's happening right now what do I
need
the more you can start to notice and ask
yourself that question the more you can
start to learn where you need to make
your needs known within a relationship
and the more you're able to make your
needs known within a relationship and
draw boundaries around what's important
to you the less likely you are to
deactivate and find yourself exiting the
relationship when you are in a
deactivated state number four the
problem of struggling to work out who is
responsible for what in a relationship
often if you are starting out with a
fearful avoidant attachment system to
help you get oriented within all of
these stories and figure out where the
truth lies it's going to be really
helpful to have what Alice Miller calls
an enlightened witness so someone like a
therapist who is trained in attachment
Theory a support group that is based
around attachment theory that has an
understanding of the ways in which you
might be distorting information and can
help you find common ground when you're
going really far in wonder direction or
the other with your attachment responses
so having some sort of professional or
peer group or even a close friend who's
well versed in this stuff and knows you
well who can remind you of who you are
when you are really lost in one response
or the other can go a really long way to
helping you Orient yourself in a
coherent and consistent narrative about
your attachment relationships and once
you have a true coherent and consistent
narrative about your attachment
relationships that integrates both what
actually happened and what true
undistorted emotions you had about it
you are well on your way to earning
security which brings us to the last
point in order to learn to access that
true pain that you have so much trouble
finding within yourself you're probably
going to need to go on a bit of an
attachment healing Journey the journey
to tolerating true emotional pain in the
moment that it's happening and being
able to carry yourself through that pain
without offloading it onto other people
or letting it Fester endlessly inside of
yourself that is the journey to secure
attachment and it does not happen
overnight it happens in thousands of
individual moments where you commit to
staying present with what's happening
instead of running away with some story
about what's happening and you learn to
tend to your own emotions with respect
to other peoples this is a long process
however it only gets better the longer
you walk down that path and at the end
of that path is the place of secure
attachment where yes breakups still hurt
but it is a clean pain because you
understand what happened you understand
what you need to heal from it and you
move forward in a much more linear
Direction and if you're starting from a
place of fearful avoidance this might
feel so out of reach but I promise you
that with time and intention and the
willingness to be very honest with
yourself it can get unbelievably better
one of my favorite quotes by Carl Young
all neuroses is a substitute for
legitimate suffering and so while this
might not sound that cheery what this
process is is the process of replacing
neurotic patterns of thought and
behavior that we can get stuck in and
circle around in for ages with the
experience of being present with our
true suffering once we know how to do
that we can get over it and actually
move on alright that's all I have to say
for today on the topic of fearful
avoidance and the struggle to move past
romantic relationships as always let me
know what you guys are thinking feeling
experiencing as you watch this I love
you all I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children and I will see you back here
again super soon
[Music]