hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today I wanted to talk
about the word enmeshment and the main
reason I want to talk about this term is
because I use it frequently on this
channel but I have never made a video to
just explain what the term enmeshment
means as well as some ways that you can
recognize if it's something that you
might be struggling with when it comes
to your close relationships so in a
future video we're going to talk about
what enmeshment looks like specifically
in romantic relationships but today
we're going to talk about in a more
General sense what enmeshment is and
some signs that you might come from an
emotionally enmeshed family unit the
reason why I want to focus on the family
unit today is because that tends to be
where we develop these Tendencies so
those who come from emotionally enmeshed
family Dynamics it's often because there
is a pattern intergenerationally of that
being the way that families operate on
one side or the other so if the parents
kind of learn that this is normal and
this is how families are they're more
likely to structure their own family in
a similar way or it can be the case that
there is what we would call pendulum
parenting happening so someone who grows
up in a very kind of cold distant
emotionally barren household might go
I'm going to do things completely
differently than my parents and they go
so far in the other direction that they
end up with an emotionally enmeshed
family unit so the reason I'm saying all
of this is because I want to make it
clear that emotional enmeshment is not
something that most family units
consciously decide to develop as a main
way of relating to each other this is
often the outcome of two parents who
never had secure relating properly
modeled to them in their own childhood
growing up and starting a family without
the proper tools and resources that they
really need to keep that family unit
functioning in an emotionally healthy
way so with that being said let's start
with the definition what is enmeshment
enmeshment is a term that was originally
coined by a man named Salvador mnuchin
who did a lot of really incredible work
in the field of family therapy and he
describes an enmeshed family as one
where personal boundaries are diffused
or not particularly clear between family
members where the people in the family
or the subsystems within the family are
undifferentiated and we'll talk a bit
more about what that means and where an
over concern for other members of the
family lead to the loss of autonomy Miss
development so what that means in plain
English is that if you grew up in a
family where there were not a lot of
clear boundaries in place so where
people might have felt responsible for
each other's emotions or where it was
made clear that certain family Norms
absolutely had to be adhered to and any
deviation from those Norms would result
in rejection from the family unit it's
highly likely that you're growing up in
an enmeshed environment so we're going
to go into more detail about what this
might look like as an adult the 10 signs
I'm going to give in this video that you
might have grown up in an enmeshed
family are not diagnostic like you can't
use these 10 signs and go yes if they
apply to me it definitely means I had
family enmeshment it's possible by
random chance each of those 10 things if
they apply to you now happen for some
other reason however it's likely that if
you did grow up in an enmeshed family
unit all or most of the 10 signs are
likely to apply to you so what this
video offers is just a little bit of
contextualization if you notice I have
most of of these traits these are all
things I struggle with in relationships
it might help you understand where some
of that may have come from as well as
how it differs from secure relating a
key component of growing up in enmeshed
families is that you feel as though
enmeshment is love for a lot of people
who grew up in meshed you have trouble
understanding how boundaries lead to
healthy and loving relationships you
might have this idea of love as two
people taking on each other's problems
as their own kind of merging together
completely and being in a constant state
of extreme intimacy without a lot of
Independence and you might even perceive
your partner or close loved ones
behaving independently as a rejection
you might perceive that as ooh I'm not
important to them if they want to have
their own autonomous lives so if you
come from an enmeshed family it's likely
you're now approaching your adult
relationships with a bit of a bias when
it comes to what it means to love
someone in a secure way and hopefully
this video will help clear some of that
up so without further Ado let's get into
10 signs that you may have come from an
emotionally enmeshed family so sign
number one that you might come from an
enmeshed family Dynamic is that you feel
an extreme sense of guilt or shame
anytime you do something that deviates
significantly from the family culture so
most family units have a culture right
there are certain things that the
majority of family members connect on
and those things turn into social norms
and they turn into connection points in
a secure family those Norms are very
loose they're fluid and they change
based on the developing interests of
everybody in the family so a four out of
five family members are super interested
in sports and the fifth family member
has no interest in sports and they're
quite intellectual and they have a
different set of interests and things
that they want out of life that doesn't
necessarily threaten the rest of the
family there's going to be a natural
awareness of differences but those
differences are going to be treated with
curiosity by the people who don't relate
to them and to a certain extent the
family culture is going to be able to
absorb and incorporate those differences
and the different family members are
going to be able to learn from each
other but in an enmeshed family unit the
parents tend to think of the children as
extensions of their own ego so if the
parent really Prides themselves on
valuing a certain thing or being a
certain way in the world and they have a
child who has a kind of natural and
unique set of preferences that are
different from that there's going to be
this sense of threat that comes online
because whoever that person is in the
family unit who feels threatened might
have this sense of I need this one
member to stop being the way that they
are because I see them as a reflection
of me it's that lack of differentiation
insecure relationships whether those are
family Dynamics or Partnerships if
someone else is behaving in a way that
we wouldn't necessarily choose but it's
not something extreme like oh they're
breaking the law in a significant way
we're going to be able to go that's them
I'm me they're making their choices and
their choices are their choices I don't
see their choices as a reflection of me
I see it as a reflection of them and my
relationship with them is one of support
and care so if they're making decisions
I wouldn't make it's my job to get
curious about those decisions to figure
out what's going on for them and to take
an interest in what they're doing so I
can play a supporting role for them in
their lives now this is once again
different than let's say a parent
showing some concern if they think that
their child has chosen a life path that
they fear is going to be challenging for
them or that might not provide them with
Financial Security or whatever it is in
that case in a secure dynamic they might
Express concern they might work with
their child to help them figure out how
they're going to make ends meet if this
is the path they want to go down but
what will not be present is this kind of
existential ego threat like I need this
person to stop doing that because I
wouldn't do it in differentiated
relationships there's this Awareness on
behalf of both parties you are you I am
me the choices you make are not my
choices and they don't need to be in an
enmeshed family the opposite is true
right your choices are a reflection of
me there go if you are doing something I
wouldn't do my response to you is
probably going to be subtle or overt
rejection or maybe even just ignoring
whatever it is that you're doing that I
don't like and growing up in a family
where your passions your interests the
natural extensions of who you are is
ignored by the other family members that
can become really lonely and isolating
over time and you might learn to hide
your authentic interests and passions
from other people because you have this
ingrained sense of who I am at my core
is offensive to others or it threatens
others or there must be something wrong
with it that I don't understand and so
well into adulthood you might
automatically experience feelings of
guilt or shame anytime you are doing
something that differs from the culture
of your family unit your workplace your
romantic relationship your friend group
there might be this instinctual sense
that being my own individual person is
not okay and that's a very sad but very
normal response to have if you grew up
in a highly enmeshed family so I know
number two you may have grown up in an
enmeshed family unit is that you
struggle to differentiate whose feelings
are whose when you get close to someone
so if you have a close friendship a
partnership a roommate situation or
within your family of origin you might
really struggle to understand that if
someone is feeling down if they are
struggling if they are angry or upset
one day it is not your job to fix the
way that they are feeling in an enmeshed
family unit one person's feelings very
quickly become everybody's feelings
particularly if the person who has a
certain emotion is a really strong
influencer of the family culture and in
mesh families there's a lot of language
like you are making your father angry or
everything I do I do for my family right
there's not a natural owning of One's
Own experiences I'm feeling angry and
frustrated I chose to have a family and
that comes with certain sacrifices that
I also chose to make that's the
differentiated worldview however if you
grew up with that enmeshment with that
sense of 1 person's feelings are
everybody's responsibility you're likely
to still naturally carry that world view
into your adult life so if someone
you're close to comes to you and starts
telling you that you are the reason why
they are feeling X Y or Z you're going
to naturally go that must be true I must
be the reason they're feeling those ways
because that is how emotions work right
someone can take a feeling and put it
inside of someone else now this is
different from taking responsibility for
the specific things we do that impact
others so insecure relationships and
insecure families there is a natural
sense of understanding you are you I am
me sometimes I might say something to
you that is hurtful sometimes I might do
something that upsets you or that angers
you but when I communicate it to you I
can make it clear that the feeling is
mine that I am taking responsibility and
owning the feeling and that I'm bringing
it up to you as a way that we can work
to resolve this issue as a team and in
family dynamics that are secure the
parents do not expect the children to
have adult levels of emotional reasoning
right they understand that children get
angry they throw tantrums and if the
parent is getting frustrated by that it
is the parent's job to figure out a way
to manage their own frustration to the
point where they can then be present
with the child who's experiencing their
own distressing emotions and help them
work through that without taking it
personally secure parents understand
that children are inherently emotional
beings and it is their role as a parent
to keep themselves emotionally regulated
enough to respond to their children's
emotional states it is not the job of
the child to regulate their behavior in
such a way that keeps the parent
emotionally regulated but in enmeshed
family units that's exactly what tends
to happen sign number three that you
might come from an emotionally enmeshed
family is that you tend to naturally
inhibit any thoughts opinions or World
Views you have that contradict the
thoughts opinions and World Views of the
people around you again if you learned
early on that my authentic being my
authentic thoughts beliefs interests are
psychologically threatening to other
people you're going to learn to
instinctually inhibit what you truly
think and believe because in your
experience expressing those things leads
only to disharmony and hurt feelings
insecure Dynamics whether those are
families Partnerships workplaces
whatever it is different opinions and
beliefs can be voiced with respect and
treated with curiosity as they're worked
through and of course there's always
going to be hot button issues that are
more likely to divide a room but if you
come from an enmeshed family even the
smallest difference of opinion is going
to feel like a hot button issue to you
let's say you don't like Indian food and
you're in a group of five people who are
going to lunch somewhere and it's
explicitly stated that no one has a
super strong preference and one person
goes how about Indian and the other
three go yeah I really like Indian it
might feel impossible for you to say I
actually don't like Indian that much how
about we go to the Mexican place down
the street even in situations where it's
explicitly stated that the stakes are
low that other people are open to input
you find it really difficult to speak up
and say your piece if it differs in any
smaller large way from what other people
are agreeing on because again early on
you being different from the family
culture in any way truly did pose a
psychological threat to the rest of the
unit so instinctually you've learned to
keep those things inhibited even in
situations where it doesn't necessarily
make sense to and in situations where it
actually makes more sense not to right
let's say you're forming a new close
friendship or romantic partnership with
someone and you're just going along with
and saying yes to everything that they
think and feel and believe even if you
don't agree or you don't like some of
the things they like you're not actually
letting them get to know you and they
might really want to know you a big part
of what's really interesting when we're
getting to know new people is figuring
out where we differ from them and where
we can learn from each other especially
when it comes to romantic relationships
figuring out the ways in which we're
different from other people can go a
long way in creating a sense of sexual
attraction right that can create the
sense of intrigue about the other so if
we're erasing ourselves when we're
trying to form close relationships we're
not really forming close relationships
tips were fawning over someone and this
isn't intentional or malicious but
unfortunately it does tend to lead to
the development of relationships where
we could know someone for many years and
they don't ever really know us because
we haven't actually said what we think
feel and believe to them we've just kind
of mimicked them out of fear of
repercussion if we do something
different sign number four that you come
from an emotionally enmeshed family very
similar to number three you tend to
operate under a false social mask most
of the time because you experience
instant shame in moments when you feel
as though you are different from someone
else
again in Secure Dynamics differences are
treated with curiosity and in a lot of
cases celebration in enmeshed
relationships differences are seen as
threats Ergo you may have learned to
play the part of the person who agrees
with everyone gets along with everyone
and doesn't bring too much of your real
self into social dynamics because you
remember that intense shame that you
would feel in the moments of
disconnection early on in your life when
you did express your authentic self and
had them rejected so I have a video that
I will link in the description of this
video about toxic shame and how it can
lead to the development of this false
social Persona that we use to hide our
true selves from the world but this is
very often the product of coming from an
enmeshed family unit you learn to
believe who I inherently am is wrong
broken flawed in some way because it was
consistently rejected when I would
Express the ways in which I was
different from other people so my mode
of operation becomes figuring out what
the values and belief systems of
everyone else in the room are and then
play to the highest common denominator
to decrease the chance that I'm going to
experience rejection even if that means
keeping my true self chronically hidden
sign number five that you came from an
emotionally enmeshed family and this one
is a more direct commentary on the
family unit itself your family of origin
has a very strong US versus them
mentality in some capacity now all
social groups include in-group and
out-group thinking if you're a part of a
very focused and dedicated mountain
biking group you are going to normally
start separating out in your mind when
you meet new people mountain biker or
non-mountain biker because you have this
shared interest with one group of people
and it takes up a big part of your world
view
however the difference is that you are
not going to look at non-mountain bikers
and go these people are wrong or flawed
and I'm going to reject anyone in my
life who does not mountain bike you
might do this if you have a lot of
enmeshment wounding and you're now
playing that out in your adult life
however for the most part you're going
to understand this is an interest I have
other people don't have it and that is
fine however in an enmeshed family unit
the things that become a part of the
family culture get moralized about we
are small town folk we hate the city
Folk they're greedy and immoral or we
are educated dignified City people
everyone who doesn't live like us is
uncivilized Hillbillies we're an
athletic family if you're not athletic
you must be a lazy slob we are an
intellectual family if you're not an
intellectual you must be a bumbling
idiot or this can come down to Lifestyle
things right we are very timely and if
your number one value is not being
timely and clean and organized you are a
slob and you are a bad person or we're
so relaxed and chill and we're not like
those other uptight people if you want
to move to the city and get a corporate
job you're a sellout and you have no
soul and of course the more obvious ways
this can get expressed can also be
adhering to a certain religion voting in
a particular direction
etc etc again the idea here is how much
are differences tolerated versus how
much are they punished in a family
Dynamic are there actually things that
are just reflections of natural
personality differences or interests or
preferences that are treated as though
they are morally wrong and therefore the
person who exhibits those preferences
begins to get seen as immoral in the
eyes of the family in that case you're
likely looking at enmeshment right
boundaries are not clear people are not
differentiated from each other and
differences are not only not treated
with curiosity and interest they result
in contempt from other family members or
exclusion even if the differences are
relatively benign things number six that
you grew up in an enmeshed family and
this is a huge one for a lot of people
is that you have a tendency to not voice
what your needs are in a relationship
but instead try to give and give so try
to anticipate what other people's needs
are often without explicitly asking them
if those are things they want you to do
for them and then you get resentful when
they do not naturally try to anticipate
and meet your needs in return
so insecure Dynamics people make their
needs clear if they have certain
expectations for the relationship or if
there's certain things that they would
really like for their partner to do for
them they ask for those things they open
up lines of communication about them in
enmeshed family Dynamics making your
needs your preferences or your
boundaries clear threatens the family
sense of enmeshment right it threatens
that idea that everybody has to secretly
attend to each other's needs without
explicitly stating what their needs are
air go if you grew up in that type of
environment you're going to get really
confused when you reach adulthood about
why everybody is not operating the way
you are operating which is trying to
read each other's minds and meet each
other's needs without anybody having to
say explicitly what their needs are if
you get into a partnership with a secure
person you might be surprised to find
that if you don't raise an issue or tell
them what your need is they assume that
that need is not there for you because
if they grew up in an unenmeshed family
they just expect that if you of
something you really need or want out of
the relationship you're going to tell
them what that thing is so this can be a
really hard one for a lot of people to
overcome in their attachment healing
Journey because you grew up operating
under these implicit relationship
contracts it's going to feel so
confusing anytime you find yourself in a
social situation that operates on more
secure principles which bleeds naturally
into sign number seven that you may have
grown up in an emotionally enmeshed
family is that you struggle to
understand what a boundary is like when
people talk about having boundaries it
really isn't clear to you what they mean
or how you could come up with those or
how you would possibly enforce them if
you understand differentiation it's
actually very easy to understand what a
boundary is a boundary is an if then
statement if this happens then I will do
this to keep myself emotionally safe
however when you grew up in a family
Dynamic where boundaries did not exist
or were not allowed to exist you might
be more prone to thinking of a boundary
as a way in which you want to or are
going to try to change somebody else's
Behavior so you might think of
boundaries as terms like you need to
speak to me like this or you need to
text me this often right that's not an
if then statement so it's not a boundary
however that may have been the way your
family of origin operated and the
implicit second half of that statement
may have been or else I will
consistently reject you give you the
silent treatment not invite you to
things because people in enmeshed family
Dynamics don't hold themselves
responsible for pursuing their own sense
of Happiness autonomy and well-being in
life they see that as kind of a group
effort that everybody has to contribute
to children who grow up in enmeshed
families tend to grow up thinking the
same is true of let's say their romantic
relationships if I'm in a romantic
relationship and I come from an enmeshed
family I might think it's no longer just
my job to make sure that I'm happy and
okay and doing well in the world it's
now also my partner's job and if I think
that they're not doing a good enough job
at helping me achieve a sense of purpose
and meaning and happiness in my life I
might start subtly punishing them for
that and expect that those subtle kind
of punishments I'm Doling out will give
them the hint that it's their turn to
change their behavior so that I am
happier there's a lack of
differentiation happening the kind of
flawed assumption there is if we are in
a couple we are no longer responsible
for our own individual senses of
Happiness fulfillment and well-being we
now have one big glob of well-being that
both of us have to contribute to by
being hyper aware of each other's needs
at all times and attending to them
without being explicit about what they
are sign number eight that you may come
from an emotionally enmeshed family is
that when your family offers you support
or advice or encouragement often what
they're actually doing is creating a
dynamic of dependency so instead of
let's say empowering you to make more
money or to figure out your career
choices for yourself if you're
struggling they might continuously go oh
why don't you just move back in with us
for a while while you figure it out and
it's not to say that these things are
always negative however if you find that
most of the time when you're struggling
rather than empowering you they're
attempting to savior you it's highly
likely that that's a continuation of
that enmeshed codependent Dynamic right
and again this plays out in adult
relationships if you find that when your
friends loved ones partners are
struggling with something you kind of
like the thought of them needing you to
help them sort through it and this can
manifest in a variety of different ways
it's highly likely that that's that
enmeshed patterning continuing to play
out when we are secure we want our loved
ones to thrive on their own and to not
need us but to want to be with us
because they enjoy our company and we
enjoy theirs and we understand that the
relationship can happen in a much more
free and spontaneous way if our needs
are not significantly intertwined and
this doesn't mean just to be clear that
you never have let's say certain
Arrangements where one partner is out of
work and needs a little bit of extra
financial support or the other takes on
certain responsibilities for the pair
that they just enjoy doing more and
there's a kind of natural trade-off
between those things insecure Dynamics
where there is a sense of explicit
consensual dependency it's often because
both parties explicitly chose for it to
be that way one person might prefer to
stay home with the kids and the other
might prefer to go to work and if both
are happy with that Dynamic there's
nothing wrong with it where you get into
trouble is if one partner prefers to be
the breadwinner and prefers for their
partner to not make their own money
because they like that that keeps them
dependent on them or if one partner kind
of wants to monopolize as much time as
they can with the children because they
like feeling like they have a secret
alliance with their children against the
other parent this is where we start
getting into those enmeshment Dynamics
so secure support is always about
empowering the other person to better
thrive on their own enmeshed support is
always about about solving someone
else's problem for them in a way that
keeps them entangled with you in some
significant way and often in enmesh
Dynamics this happens in various
directions right if you have an enmeshed
romantic relationship maybe one partner
is doing all of the emotional work
because the other person can't or won't
do it and the other person is being
independent and proactive enough for
both people in the couple making all of
the hard more logical decisions because
the other person can't or won't and in
mesh Dynamics help that is given is
usually not truly help it is an implicit
contract that the other person now owes
you something and an entire family unit
can operate under these implicit
contracts and these implicit ious
forever and many families or romantic
Partnerships do sign number nine that
you might come from an enmeshed family
is that you believe keeping quiet about
someone else's dysfunctional or in many
cases abusive behavior is a sign of love
when you grow up in unhealthy families
you have have what John Bradshaw and
many other psychologists in the family
therapy space call a no talk rule so no
matter what is going on in the family no
matter how dysfunctional or unhealthy
things feel there is this implicit rule
that the worst thing you can do is
betray the unit by telling someone else
about the dysfunction so often in
dysfunctional families you will have
various family members covering up the
overall dysfunction in multiple
different ways and if you grew up with
this Dynamic with this sense of we do
not talk we do not address even to each
other the ways in which this unit is
dysfunctional you're likely to reach
adulthood and when something is
dysfunctional inside of a friendship a
romantic relationship whatever it is
you're going to see it as a sign of love
and loyalty towards that other person to
keep that thing a secret so instead of
asking for other people's advice on it
instead of seeking out support for it
instead of addressing it directly with
the other person you're often going to
have this implicit contrast track that
we don't talk about this thing and
that's what love is and I want to be
clear here this is very different from
let's say a more secure Dynamic where
you're making sure that you're getting
your facts straight before talking to
other people about something that's
going on in your relationship or where
you're just being intentional about not
gossiping about something that's really
personal to another person those are
normal secure boundaries to have the no
talk rule goes way further than any of
this in many cases it makes people feel
like if I even admit to myself that
something is dysfunctional here it means
I'm a bad person right whereas in a
secure relationship if something is
feeling unhealthy or dysfunctional they
take it to the other person put it very
explicitly on the table and talk about
it and figure out how to set boundaries
in order to make sure that both people
continue to feel respected inside of the
dynamic which is a top priority in
Secure relationships and finally sign
number 10 that you come from in enmeshed
family Dynamic is that when you see
people relating in a secure way you find
it threatening so this is something that
I hear and experience over and over
again being in the attachment space
you'll have people from both the anxious
and avoidant sides of the spectrum
saying I would just love a secure
relationship I would love to just be in
a healthy secure Dynamic and while I
absolutely believe that most people
consciously want that I think that most
people who are starting from a
significantly insecurely attached place
don't recognize just how threatening a
secure Dynamic might feel if they were
to encounter one if you are severely
anxious it's highly likely that a secure
partnership would force you into a
position of being way more autonomous
and taking way more responsibility for
your own emotions than you are naturally
comfortable with if you are severely
avoidant and haven't done a lot of work
on it yet it is highly likely that a
secure Dynamic would force you to become
way more vulnerable way more sensitive
and way more honest with yourself and
others than you are currently
comfortable being because there can be
this implicit belief when we come from
an enmeshed Dynamic that if I speak up
and assert myself and state the ways in
which I'm different and autonomous and
independent for my partner I will be
abandoned forever or on the flip side if
I make my true unpolished unsexy
vulnerabilities known to another person
I will be overpowered manipulated and
taken advantage of and in both cases
those things may have been true in your
family of origin so the work of healing
one's attachment system as an adult and
getting to a place where you can have
those secure unenmeshed relationships
means recognizing what you have
internalized to be true about all
relationships in fact was only true in
the specific Dynamic you grew up in and
there's a high chance that you might end
up in a lot of adult relationships that
mimic those early Dynamics because
enmeshment is kind of the language that
you speak relationally it's your mother
tongue so it's going to be easier for
you to unconsciously find and relate to
other people who speak the mother tongue
of enmeshment and I say that just to
make it clear that this is not a moral
failing it's not something anybody would
choose but it is what tends to naturally
occur when enmeshment is the way that we
learn to relate to other people and so
it becomes our model for what we think
love is so this video has been 10 signs
that indicate you might come from an
enmeshed family later on we're going to
talk a lot about how enmeshment shows up
in our adult relationships how to
recognize in our adult relationships as
well as how to begin the differentiation
process as an adult so we can start to
trust that who we authentically are and
the thoughts feelings perspectives that
we authentically have can be brought
into safe and secure relationships in
adulthood if that is something that we
want to start doing as always let me
know in the comments section of this
video what you're thinking feeling
what's coming up for you as you're
watching this where you're at in this
process I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really soon
foreign
[Music]