hey guys heidi preeb here so
if you thought that the family roles
series was over
we would be thinking the same thing
however
i was publishing the videos this week
and i kept feeling like okay there are
things that i've left out there are
questions that i feel like these videos
raise that i don't necessarily answer
within the videos
maybe no one else feels like that i
don't know but i felt like that so i
decided that a follow-up video was
needed or 10 we'll see where we just
talk about
where these roles come from
and also
who is to blame for them because i think
that anytime we start talking about
things like attachment family roles
things that are interpersonal wounds
this very natural question arises of if
we want to start healing from these
roles or if we want to start healing
from our attachment styles do we start
immediately placing all of the blame on
our parents and expecting them to do the
work to get us better and this video is
an attempt to answer that question as
evenly and fairly and compassionately as
possible so the thing about family roles
is that you can't really look at them
without looking a couple of generations
back and then a couple of generations
back from that and then a couple of
generations back from that because while
we only have direct experience with our
own families and maybe one or two
generations before us depending on how
long your grandparents and
great-grandparents were kicking around
for these roles and the specific
dysfunctions that were born into come
from a very long line of patterns of
behavior of patterns within our genes of
patterns within hardships and problems
that our families have faced
and it's really hard to look at any one
family and say that one person is to
blame for anything so when we were
talking about the scapegoat and the
golden child in previous videos i felt
compelled to expand upon why a parent
would ever create a dynamic where one
child is a scapegoat and one child is a
golden child and the reason why i wanted
to address this further is because when
you look at these family roles online
you'll find a lot of videos just simply
pinning all of this on the parent being
a narcissist or the parent being toxic
but what do those labels really mean
where do they come from and how do we
work with them are the natural questions
that get raised out of that right
because if we believe that toxic people
and narcissists are just magically
falling out of the sky it doesn't really
give us much to work with in terms of
how to stop that pattern so i'm going to
give you a made-up example to kind of
help explain how we can't look at these
instances in isolation okay
so let's say you have a little boy named
johnny and johnny is two years old and
he came into the world like all children
do with a pure heart and a desire to do
good and to please people and to get
along happily with his family and his
friends like every single baby and every
single human who comes into this world
he had a very inherent need for love and
connection
right all babies have that but
unfortunately johnny was born into a
very abusive household so from the time
he was one or two years old johnny's dad
used to hit him or beat him up when he
was crying when he expressed a need for
comfort when he wouldn't settle down
after he'd been fed and it didn't really
seem to matter what johnny did or what
he tried with his parents if he tried
showing his vulnerability and acting
really cute and coy or if he tried to
act tough and like nothing bothered him
there was no really reason or rhyme to
why he got beat and why he sometimes
didn't but like i said johnny came into
the world with a very pure intention to
connect and love people and be loved by
people and so the thing that got him
through his childhood was this belief
that when i grow up i'm going to do
better than my parents did for me right
i am not going to abuse my children the
way that my dad abused me i'm going to
be loving and patient and kind with my
children and i'm going to prove that i
can do things differently and i can
break this cycle so johnny does all of
the things that you would expect a good
boy to do he goes to school and he tries
as hard as he can to focus and get good
grades which is hard for him because
there's so much chaos at home but he
does everything he can to make his
teachers happy he joins organizations
that give him a sense of structure that
he doesn't have at home he becomes a boy
scout as a child he joins a youth group
as a pre-teen and becomes involved in
the church and he does everything he can
think of to try to be a good boy who
does right by other people and not turn
into the monster that he perceives his
dad to be now in high school johnny
falls in love and he convinces himself i
am not going to have a broken home the
way my family was broken he asks his
girlfriend to marry him when they're
both 18 at 22 they welcome their first
child and their first child is
everything that johnny had ever hoped
and more so he looks at this child it's
a baby girl and he goes i'm going to
give this baby girl absolutely
everything on earth and anyone who knows
johnny would tell you he thinks the sun
shines out of that baby's ass he really
wants to share the workload with his
wife he wakes up in the middle of the
night time and time again with the baby
and as the baby grows up he's really
eager to put her in all of the best
programs give her all of the best
opportunities send her to the best
school that he's capable of sending her
to because he is hell bent on giving
this child a better life than the life
that he had now so far this story sounds
pretty benign right it's a happy story
it's a redemption story it's a story
about a man who is breaking the cycle of
abuse in his family and trying to do
better by his own children but what we
don't get is the perspective of the
child who grows up with this feeling
that they don't quite understand but
something tells them my father's mental
health and sense of self is resting upon
me being a good happy kid
right because johnny is so fixated on
changing his family history and being
the father that his father never was the
baby starts to notice when i show that
i'm happy and smiling and giggling my
dad responds really well to me but when
i show distress when i show anger when i
show frustration my dad gets really
dysregulated he might not yell at me he
might not hit me but he seems stressed
and children who are full of mirror
neurons especially when their babies
pick up on that distress in parents
right so this baby is being subtly
conditioned to only show positive
emotion to only act like they're happy
and everything's good and everything's
fine and they're excelling at preschool
and they're excelling at kindergarten
and they're excelling at grade one and
grade two in grade three because they
sense that the more they shine and the
more that they show to their dad i am
having a perfect childhood the more
regulated their dad stays and we've
talked about this before a regulated
parent is essential to the survival of a
child and children know this without
having the language for it and they will
naturally do whatever they feel like
they need to do to get consistent
caregiving from their parent which
requires a parent who's emotionally
stable now let's say johnny and his wife
have a second child and by this point
johnny is feeling really confident in
his abilities as a parent right the
first child went swimmingly so johnny
figures second baby will be a breeze now
second baby comes along and this baby is
colicky this baby no matter how much he
is rocked or soothed or comforted or fed
does not stop
crying so for the first couple of weeks
johnny and his wife see different
parenting experts they take the baby in
for medical tests they confirm that
nothing is physically wrong and so they
just try everything they can think of to
try to get the baby to settle but johnny
without consciously recognizing it is
getting extremely triggered by the
baby's distress if he were a perfect
father if he were a good responsive
attuned father he would know how to
settle his baby and this thought just
gnaws at him and gnaws at him as the
baby begins to grow up so he comforts
himself by telling himself this baby
just has a different temperament than
our first baby our first baby i realize
now was just a good easy baby and this
baby just has a different kind of wicked
temperament about him but i am a good
patient virtuous father so i'm going to
do everything within my power to give
this second baby all of the same
opportunities that the first one had so
johnny puts the second baby in the same
schools the same sports the same
programs as the first baby but the
second baby isn't quite taking to those
activities in fact the second baby has a
little bit of a rebellious streak and as
he grows up he often talks back to
johnny and the more he talks back to
johnny the more frustrated johnny gets
because he's doing everything under the
sun to give this baby every opportunity
he can possibly give him and yet he
doesn't seem to appreciate any of it and
johnny knows that he's a good father
because he gave his first baby all of
these opportunities and she is excelling
she's getting straight a's she's making
her teachers and her coaches and her
peers proud but this second baby is just
a little bit of a bad apple and at this
point in the story we might feel really
bad for johnny because johnny truly is
trying with his kids he really wants his
second child to have all the same
opportunities that his first child had
but now let's look at that second child
maybe they grow up they're 30 years old
sitting in a therapy room
and they're explaining to their
therapist when i was a young child i
always felt like when i would show any
frustration any anger any unhappiness my
dad would get really really out of sorts
it seemed to make him incredibly
distressed when i was distressed and
that was scary for me
and sometimes my dad would get really
angry and he would blow up he would
scream he would yell he would ask me why
i just couldn't be like my sister and
then he would tell me i was the reason
why he got so angry i was the reason why
he lost his temper i was the reason why
he threw dishes or threatened to abandon
me or hit me and told me it was all for
my own good and so anyone who's talking
to johnny's son as an adult is going to
have a pretty negative view of johnny
but let's go back to johnny's
perspective and see what's happening for
him in those moments so when his son
grows up and starts talking back to him
and starts screaming things like i hate
you at him as three and four and
five-year-olds are want to do johnny
might have a ptsd reaction because he's
flashing back to his own father
screaming at him and yelling at him and
telling him derogatory things about
himself and johnny not realizing that
he's now in a completely different
situation might completely lose it and
scream and rage and yell the same way he
wanted to as a child but couldn't and
because johnny so desperately wants to
give his children a different childhood
than he had he finds it psychologically
intolerable to even think about the fact
that he might have some of the anger
issues that his father had so to justify
his outbursts he decides in his own mind
that his second child is just ungrateful
a bad kid they have problems with
authority maybe they have oppositional
defiance disorder and he returns to his
role as a virtuous parent by bringing
his child into a psychologist and going
please fix him now as an adult johnny's
child might want to point the finger at
his father and go my father was a
narcissist he was toxic he was abusive
and it's very possible that some of
those traits do apply to johnny however
johnny was not setting out to terrorize
his son he did not wake up in the
morning with the intention to make his
son's life hell he actually woke up in
the morning from his perspective with
the intention to do the complete
opposite of what his parents did now
what he didn't realize was that he was
accidentally placing a redemption
fantasy onto his own children so
redemption fantasy is this idea that we
hold in our heads about a magical future
where a perfect harmonious relationship
that we have is going to replace all of
the pain of our past and johnny really
did believe in this story that if he
could just give his kids a happy
childhood then it would be objectively
confirmed that he was a good person like
he had spent his entire life trying to
become so what he accidentally did was
create a golden child out of his first
child and a scapegoat out of his second
child all of his good qualities all of
the things he wanted to believe about
himself that were positive he saw in his
first child who was feeding back to him
the idea that he was a perfect parent
and all of the things that were bad
about himself that he could not admit to
himself as being traits that he
possessed like rage and anger and
frustration and impatience he just
decided were his son's traits and he was
simply reacting to his bad no-good son
now where is the truth right the truth
is that johnny has both wonderful
intentions and unresolved trauma that
hijacks his brain and ends in him
abusing his child the same way his dad
abused him but denying that it's
happening and if we were to go back one
generation we would find something in
johnny's father's history that made the
way that he was abusing johnny makes
sense to him within his own mind so
here's the interesting part about all of
this to be a cycle breaker in the truest
sense of the word you cannot have the
intention to never do anything wrong
right because that is a redemption
fantasy it's looking at this magical
future where you will somehow be so good
that you are not human that you are more
christ-like or god-like or your child is
more christ-like or god-like than human
right breaking the cycle of trauma means
being able to look at yourself as having
impulses towards kindness and generosity
and connection and also impulses towards
anger and frustration and intolerance
and being able to work with yourself in
an honest way so let's orient ourselves
back in time and space and talk about
the family roles so let's say you really
recognize yourself in the role of the
family hero or the role of the scapegoat
or the role of the golden child and the
natural question that comes up is do i
blame my parent and the answer is
you could blame your parent but then who
do they blame
their parents i guess right and then
their parents well why are they messed
up well i guess they have to blame their
parents and then we end up going back
generations and generations and
generations and where does it end right
we end up blaming adam and eve and then
who is their dysfunctional parent right
so it's all god's fault it becomes this
absolutely ridiculous goose chase trying
to figure out where the problem started
but i can already hear some of the
protests at this point of what so we
should just forgive our parents so we
should just not hold them responsible
for any abuse or any mistreatment or any
wrongdoings against us that's also not
what i'm saying so if we're looking at
how much blame should we place on the
parents there are a couple of questions
that i think need to be considered first
one what purpose does blaming the
parents serve and the answer to this is
very important because do we need to
contextualize our trauma yes
absolutely it is not helpful for us to
look at the way we turned out and not
consider what led us there which biases
did our parents have which trauma
responses did they inherit that they
played out on us that shaped us to be
the way that we are now we need to
understand that otherwise we will take
on blame where blame is not due this is
especially prevalent for the scapegoat
who grew up thinking that they are bad
they are flawed they are worthless they
are scum but not really knowing why they
thought that right but it applies to all
roles when you start to understand all
of that was projections of what my
parent couldn't accept was within
themselves that they placed on to me
instead then you become free of that
right you can choose to step out of that
role and create your own identity so in
that sense contextualizing where your
trauma came from can be extraordinarily
helpful however there's a point at which
this process stops being helpful and
where it stops being helpful is the
point at which we decide it is not our
responsibility to fix our own trauma
because we didn't inflict it on
ourselves right so if you're expecting
your parents to turn around and go oh my
god i've seen the error of my ways i'm
the reason for all of your problems let
me fix it for you you are living in your
own redemption fantasy and that is
keeping you stuck in a cycle of delusion
and pain and at this point i want to
acknowledge i'm a master's student of
psychology i'm not a registered
clinician so the advice that i'm giving
is not clinical advice i highly
encourage you to seek out a mental
health professional who can help you
process these roles and anything that
i'm telling you is solely based on what
i have learned through my own healing
process actually that's not true a lot
of it is stuff i've read in books but i
will reference the books when and where
that applies now before we go further i
want to acknowledge that it might
actually be difficult for you to either
blame or remove blame from your parent
based on your attachment style because
if you are avoidantly attached you have
a tendency by virtue of the way that
your worldview formed before the age of
two to take on responsibility for things
that are not yours so you might truly
believe my parent was just punishing me
for my own good my parent was a saint my
parent did everything right by me i just
should have behaved better i shouldn't
have acted out it was my fault and every
punishment they doled out really grew me
into a stronger person and this
worldview can function to the point of
delusion i remember one time having a
conversation with a very avoidantly
attached person who was explaining to me
that their parent was so compassionate
and so kind that they would never take
them or any of their siblings to the
doctor when they were really ill because
they didn't want to bother the doctor
and wasn't that so virtuous of their
parent and i was like okay well that was
child neglect but i will let you work
that one out for yourself in therapy so
avoidance tend to naturally overtake
responsibility and believe that the
abuse that happened to them was their
own fault and so when they see other
people complaining about being abused
their natural impulse is to go all these
people are just playing the victim same
thing that happened to them happened to
me and i'm fine you might get that
attitude in the adult world view of
johnny's golden child on the other side
of things anxiously attached people tend
to naturally divide the world into pure
evil villains and pure good victims and
the reason this happens is because when
they were young they were raised in an
unpredictable environment okay so dad
comes home kicks his boots off looks
upset some days that means a beating
other days it means he's going to wrap
them up in a giant bear hug and take
them out for ice cream so trying to
guess what their parent was thinking was
almost impossible to do so they didn't
bother learning that skill so as an
adult it can be difficult still for the
anxiously attached person to understand
that the way they're feeling is not
necessarily an accurate representation
of what is factually happening in their
environment so what that means is there
is this belief that negative intent must
be behind negative action so if you have
an anxiously attached wound it might be
really difficult for you to try to hold
this idea of your parent or your abuser
as a complex individual in your mind and
that is something that 100 you will need
professional help working through and
this might also raise the question well
why should we forgive our abusive
parents brilliant psychologists have
tackled this question for ages i highly
recommend john bradshaw healing the
shame that binds you in particular is an
excellent excellent book for anyone who
is consciously coping with the wounds of
an abusive parent and that can be any
form of abuse whether it's physical
emotional sexual psychological and also
pete walker the book complex ptsd from
surviving to thriving has some
incredible resources in it for dealing
with the after effects of growing up in
a dysfunctional family but i believe
it's john bradshaw who talks about how
rushing to forgive your parents or your
abusers can actually be a sign of trying
to bypass the work right so i believe it
was him who said that you should forgive
only after you are no longer hurting so
your role as an adult is to work with a
therapist a support group mental health
services to help you resolve and start
healing the pain of the family dynamic
that you grew up in and i plug this
almost every video but i'm going to plug
it again here adult children of
alcoholics is a wonderful free 12-step
support group for anyone who's grown up
in a dysfunctional dynamic it does not
have to be an alcoholic home you could
have completely sober parents and still
attend this support group and it would
still cater to you it's a wonderful
resource where they talk about the
long-term effects of childhood
dysfunction and how to show up
differently as an adult who's been
through it so the question of do you
forgive your parents becomes a dual part
question one where are you at in your
healing journey are you just starting to
recognize that what happened to you is
abuse maybe it's not time to forgive
maybe it will never be time to forgive
for you or maybe down the line you'll
start to see both your abuse and your
parents abuse and their parents abuse
before them and you'll naturally feel
more forgiving the dynamics of
forgiveness or not forgiveness of
contact or no contact and all of the
intricacies in between are completely
personal and they have to be worked out
by you in a timeline that works for you
right i would never tell anyone forgive
your abusive parent or don't forgive
your abusive parent that is so personal
that is so dependent on context and
situation and that's something that you
and the mental health professional who
is helping you have to figure out
together what's going to be best for
your healing but this question of should
we blame the parents is such a vital one
to ask at any stage of the healing
process and at different stages of the
healing process is probably going to
mean different things to you right at
one point it might mean contextualizing
the situation and going i'm going to
look at my parent as both a victim and
an abuser in order to understand what
happened to them and the sequence of
events that led them to abuse that i
don't want to follow
right that's the most important part if
we are looking at our parents as all bad
and narcissists or villains were going
to miss the warning signs that they also
missed in ourselves
right that was johnny's problem he
looked at his dad as purely evil so he
didn't look at what warning signs might
have gone off for my dad where could he
have stopped and so he didn't notice
those warning signs when they came up
for him right
when we learn what sequence of events
led our parents to abuse we can start to
recognize that sequence of events if
it's happening for us so the end point
of this has nothing to do with your
parents right we're focusing on you and
how you can grow and how you can become
the best version of yourself and how you
cannot pass on the legacy of abuse and
understanding that legacy of abuse
understanding that intergenerational
trauma understanding what it was that
caused all of these people who came
before you and your family to act a
certain way can really help you
understand how not to perpetuate it
right because delusional fantasies about
being a good person all of the time do
not work
they just do not we are all people with
tempers with flaws with challenges with
things that make us angry and irrational
and upset and if we are unwilling to
look at those things within ourselves
and notice when they're coming up for us
and when we're in the danger zone of
repeating that cycle of trauma we
absolutely cannot fix it inside of all
of us is a desire to do good and be
virtuous and also a desire to act out in
anger and fear when we feel threatened
an awareness of both helps us to nurture
the one that we want to nurture which is
the stable rational part of ourselves
who sees even ourselves as both good and
bad and is having the opportunity in
every moment to choose which impulse to
act on i feel like i got off topic in
this but i don't think i did i think
that all ties back in
the point i'm trying to make here is
that when we put all of the blame on
someone else what we're often doing is
putting ourselves in pure victim mode
and the other person in pure abuser mode
and well that can be a helpful step for
sure in the healing process there also
is a
very um
dry unemotional sequence of events that
we can access to help us understand how
trauma's gotten passed down
intergenerationally and if we aren't
taking the time to understand that and
to understand that all abusers are
usually in some form victims of some
other trauma themselves then we don't
know how to stop the cycle like we don't
have the information we need right so
i'm not telling you don't blame your
parents i'm not telling you don't get
mad about your abuse but what i'm saying
is we should contextualize the parents
and we should use that information to
contextualize ourselves and our own
responses and our own impulses because
that context allows us to be accurate in
our thinking and only accurate thinkers
are going to be able to break the cycles
otherwise we're all just johnny right
allowing our well-intentioned idealism
to perpetuate a cycle of trauma and
abuse okay that's all i have for today
this was an inflammatory subject
probably
so if there's anything that you want
clarification on in terms of what i was
implying please let me know i feel like
this video is going to be easy to
misinterpret but maybe i'm wrong let me
know your thoughts in the comments i
will provide lots of resources for
anyone who has been through
dysfunctional family abuse in any form
because this is a very serious topic and
if you've been through this you
absolutely need help no exceptions i
don't care who you are i don't care how
mentally strong you think you are you
need help to overcome interpersonal
trauma that's just how it works all
right i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and i will see
you back here soon
[Music]