hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we are
talking about
self-esteem and today I want to talk
about the development of self-esteem for
one of the family roles that has the
heartest time coming to see themselves
as a worthwhile and lovable person and
that family role is the role of the
skategoat so if you're not familiar with
what I mean when I say the term family
role or or the role of the scapegoat in
particular I will link in the
description of this video a series that
I did a couple of years ago now and it's
crazy to think that I've been on YouTube
long enough that I can link you series
I've done a couple of years ago but I
digress about what the family roles are
how we can recognize them as well as a
breakdown of some of the specific roles
and I will link the scapegoat video in
particular if you don't know what this
term means you're probably not going to
be able to make a lot of sense out of
this video so I highly recommend that
you go and watch that one first now for
those of you who do have more
familiarity with dysfunctional family
roles and the role of the scapegoat in
particular we're going to spend some
time today talking about what's in the
shadow of those who grew up as the
family scapegoat so back when I was
doing my shadow work series I started
thinking kind of passively about what
goes into the shadow for each of the
roles in a dysfunctional family so what
gets disowned from from our conscious
awareness inside of each family role and
becomes a part of how we kind of
disidentify ourselves so what traits or
qualities do we instinctively look at
and go those are not me and I was
thinking about how for the family
scapegoat so the member of the family
who was consistently told that they were
the reason the family was so
dysfunctional or why their parents were
so unhappy the things that go into the
shadow are goodness so the belief that
the self is a good person who's worthy
of love and respect and care truth so
their connection to what is actually
happening is very frequently obscured
because they're often a victim of
gaslighting and Beauty because the way
that you come to think of yourself if
you're in this position of believing
that you are the cause of everybody
else's suffering for reasons that you do
not understand is you often come to
think of yourself in a very derogatory
way and the way that you then present
yourself to the world tends to stem from
that self- derating place and it struck
me as I was thinking about this that
those traits that go into the scapegoat
Shadow are the exact same terms that are
known as the transcendentals in
philosophy so this is predominantly an
exploration of psychology not philosophy
but very quickly we're going Tok back to
Thomas aquinus who had this idea that
truth beauty and goodness were innate
properties of being so there was
objective truth beauty and goodness to
the way that the Universe inherently
functioned and if you are a DieHard
philosopher I will let you know that at
this point I'm going to start using
these properties goodness truth and
Beauty Less in their philosophical
transcendental sense and more as a
metaphor for that which we need to
connect with inside of ourselves in
order to heal from something like early
family scate coding so for the family
scapegoat healing is going to be about
reconnecting with those virtues inside
of yourself because those are the
virtues that have gone into your Shadow
and that you now believe you do not
possess so aquinus proposed that we are
experiencing truth when our mind is
conformed to objective reality and there
is no human being out there whose mind
is perfectly conformed to objective
reality all of the time however there
are ways to be much more aligned with
what is true and much less aligned with
it and often when we are raised in a
dysfunctional family system the truth is
seen as a threat so we learn to
disconnect from certain elements of it
very early on goodness through the lens
of the transcendentals is defined as
that which is fulfilling its purpose the
tricky thing is that to figure out what
our purpose is we have to know what the
truth is and so if we grew up inside of
a family system that cut us off from
knowing the truth it's it's also going
to be really challenging to fulfill our
unique purpose in the world which brings
us to the last quality of beauty so
Beauty through the lens of the
transcendentals is thought of as that
which is lovely but more specifically
it's thought of as that which is
harmonious and clear and which attracts
us to the wholeness of something so this
isn't just about something being
aesthetically pleasing it's about having
qualities in the way that something is
presented that indicates to others I'm
being drawn in towards the truth and so
you can start to see as we look at these
things how they all interrelate if we
are disconnected from truth it's going
to be challenging to fulfill our purpose
and if we are not fulfilling our purpose
we are not going to be showing up as
whole beings and if we are not showing
up from a state of wholeness it's going
to be hard to attract others towards us
in a way that is authentic and this is
often exactly what we see happening for
those who played the role of the family
scapegoat they internalized something
that was not true about themselves that
the core of their identity was that they
were a bad person who was wholly to
blame for the pain and suffering of the
people around them and so then when they
go out into the world and try to
self-actualize and grow into their adult
identity based on that core belief that
I am broken and bad and I ruin people's
lives without understanding how they
might be be drawn towards situations
that are not particularly healthy or
growing because they believe that they
are defective and Unworthy of good
things and once again the way we show up
in the world the way we present
ourselves to others the way we speak the
way we hold ourselves is all very
contingent upon Who We Believe ourselves
to be at our core so for the family
scapegoat having internalized all of
those negative beliefs about the self
bleeds into all of the actions they take
later in life and the way they present
themselves to the world unless and until
they start to realize that some of the
things they' have internalized about
themselves are fundamentally not true
and that is where the healing process
starts from so for the rest of this
video we're going to go over those three
virtues and now I'm divorcing pretty
heavily from the way that Thomas aquinus
and Plato and all of these other
philosophers thought about the
transcendentals and I'm just going to
bring this into the realm of psychology
and how we can reconnect with each of
these virtues on a personal level if we
have been through something like early
family scapegoating in order to start
seeing ourselves as people who are
worthy of interacting with and
internalizing ideas of ourselves as true
good and beautiful so one by one let's
look at how we start consciously
reconnecting with each of those virtues
starting with connecting to truth here
are some things you may have
internalized as the truth if you grew up
in the family scapegoat role one many or
all of my feelings are crazy have no
basis in reality and or are indicative
of me being a bad person so anytime I
want something I am selfish or anytime I
feel anger it's proof that I am bad so
there is something inherently wrong with
the fact that I experience certain
feelings period even if I don't express
them another thing you might have
internalized is that the things that
resulted from you being unable to
cleanly express yourself so things like
addictions you may have developed or
mental illnesses that may have come into
play Down the Line are absolutely random
not connected to any of the experiences
you've been through and just problems
you had because you are a bad person
that brought further shame unto your
family you might believe that pain you
experience is not real and that anytime
you're experiencing and especially
anytime you're expressing pain whether
that is psychological pain emotional
pain or even real physical pain you're
are being over dramatic and lying you
might believe that anytime something
goes wrong in a relationship it is your
fault regardless of the situation
regardless of what was at play between
you and the other person it must have
been your fault if someone else is upset
particularly if they are upset with you
and one of the last troubling things you
may have internalized that we're going
to talk about today is the belief that
the truth always hurts people so when
you are young and growing up inside of a
dysfunctional family unit you probably
learned if I tell other people how
dysfunctional my family is it's going to
deeply hurt the members of my family so
you may have internalized this belief
that love means keeping other people's
Secrets including secrets about how
they're behaving towards you and what
we're going to go over now is why all
five of those beliefs are are untrue and
in order to start healing from the
family scapegoat role we need to
dismantle each of those untruths one by
one so dismantling that first belief
that there is something inherently wrong
with the fact that you have certain
feelings means being willing to up your
emotional literacy game and start giving
your feelings the right name so I have a
video that I highly recommend you watch
if this is something that you struggle
with that goes over how having talk xic
shame which I would guarantee almost
every early scapegoat experiences leads
to Chronic disregulation because we
learn that there is something inherently
wrong with certain feelings however the
healing process begins with us learning
to give feelings the right name so if
you think every time that I get angry I
am being bad you are thinking
inaccurately about your own feeling
State anger is simply a piece of
information that your body is giving to
you about how it feels about the
situation that it's in or about the
memories that the situation is bringing
up anger is a perfectly healthy human
emotion how we deal with anger can be
more or less destructive of course
however experiencing anger is not the
same thing as being a bad person so we
need to parse apart those
definitions or another one that a lot of
scap to Children experience is the
feeling that wanting anything or asking
anything from their parents or other
people means that they are selfish and
this is another one we might need to
unpair the energy of Desire so wanting
something that we currently don't have
and figuring out whether or not we can
get it is not inherently the same thing
as selfishness there are of course more
pro-social and more antisocial ways of
pursuing our desires but the energy of
Desire itself is not something that is
synonymous with
selfishness all feelings we experience
are true by virtue of the fact that they
are happening they are being experienced
by us however when we start putting
judgment terms on top of emotions we get
into really murky territory so what I
want to encourage you to do in the
healing process from the family
scapegoat role is just notice which of
your feelings you to associate with
which judgments about yourself and as
much as humanly possible you want to
start separating those things out for
yourself cognitively and again I highly
recommend checking out my video on
chronic disregulation as a result of
toxic shame because it goes over in a
lot more detail how to do that so that
first action in getting closer to the
truth is the act of giving all of our
feelings the appropriate name so looking
at our feelings as raw Sensations rather
than as judgments and the second step is
learning to also give our coping
mechanisms the accurate name so instead
of looking at our lives and going I
developed this addiction or I behaved
this way in my romantic relationships or
I chose this path that I consider to be
dishonorable in many ways what we want
to start looking at those things as is
compensatory mechanisms for healthy
functioning
when we are not in touch with the truth
and when the goodness in us is not
nurtured what happens is we become
chronically disregulated because it is a
human need to think of ourselves as okay
so if we are chronically being told by
the people whose care we are in that we
are not okay that there is something
wrong with us and that we are morally
bad people we are going to need to go to
extremes to comfort oursel because that
is extremely disregulated to believe
about yourself so it is not surprising
if we develop things like addictions or
mental illnesses in response to that
early experience of being scapegoated
and if we are blaming ourselves for the
Extreme Measures that are brains and our
bodies went to to try to hold on to any
shred of dignity that we could when we
were going through that experience we're
actually going to be shaming the parts
of ourselves that we're desperately
trying to fight for our lives because
make no mistake fighting for your own
dignity and self-esteem and desire to
keep living is fighting for your life
again we may not love where we've been
in life we may not love the choices that
we've made but if we are shaming
ourselves for what we did in the fight
for our lives we are shaming the part of
ourselves that is probably the reason
why we're still here we can look at
those things and call them what they
were which was coping mechanisms and if
we can acknowledge that that's what
those were it also frees us up to begin
doing the work of choosing healthier
coping mechanisms or at the least
lessening some of our shame around the
fact that we might not yet know what
those healthier coping mechanisms are
and that might just be a question that
we need to learn to live inside of for a
little while until the answer emerges
but saying we made the choices that we
made in life because we are inherently
bad is never accurate so we we need to
start giving those choices their true
name if we want to start reconnecting to
this virtue of Truth the next thing we
want to drop into and give some credit
inside of ourselves is our own
experience of pain so once again
something you may have internalized if
you were the family scapegoat is the
idea that any pain you experience either
psychologically or in some cases even
physically is fake and that you are
always being dramatic acting out and
making a big deal out of nothing when
you are in pain so you are often
perceived by your family as being
manipulative anytime you express pain
and so this might lead to you believing
that even the pain you are directly
experiencing is made up the kind of
double whammy here is that we can
actually develop real symptoms of
illness and pain as a result of the
gaslighting that we have experienced
around our feelings and so all of this
really starts to snowball and the way
that we want to stop it from snowballing
and to reel it back in is to start
giving our own emotional psychological
and physical pain importance and value
there's another video I did on emotional
neglect that I think is going to come in
really handy here because if you were
scapegoated as a child you were
necessarily emotionally neglected and so
you might have this subconscious
experience almost of waiting for someone
to come along and tell you hey your pain
is real it exists when in reality you
are the only one who knows for sure
whether or not your pain exists and
here's a quick hack to figuring it out
if you feel it it exists if your body is
in pain that pain is real and it exists
even if you don't know the accurate
attribution for it even if you go to
many different doctors and none of them
can figure out why you're in chronic
pain that does not mean the pain is not
happening
it simply means you don't understand its
attribution but the felt sensation of it
is real and the same is true for
emotional and psychological pain you
might not know the accurate attributions
for those pains but if you are in
emotional pain you are in emotional pain
full stop your subjective experience of
it is what makes it true same goes for
any sort of mental illness or
psychological pain again it might take
some work to figure out how that pain
connects to your objective external
environment but the pain itself is Real
by virtue of it being felt in your
subjective inner world and to heal from
that scapegoat role often means being
the person who is willing to not only
acknowledge your own pain but to
advocate for it to go to doctors and go
I don't care that you don't know what
this is the symptom is real and I need
to keep digging to seek out Mental
Health Resources for yourself or
environments you can put yourself in
that are emotionally enriching during
the times when you need support even if
it doesn't look to other people like you
need support because you may have
learned to hide your feelings very well
because showing your feelings often led
to severe consequences so others might
think that you are fine when you are not
you might have to look at someone like
your therapist or psychologist and tell
them I know you think I'm not in pain
but I am and I need you to take it
seriously you might need to educate
people on why that is I learned to hide
my emotions from a very young age and
now it's very instinctive for me so it
might not look like I'm in distress but
I am and I need help I'm just full of
video recommendations but there's
another one I have called cptsd from
resentment to self- advocacy inside of
relationships that I will link in the
description of this one it goes over
exactly that how we can start to educate
other people and advocate for ourselves
about the ways in which we're in pain or
need help despite the fact that we might
not be showing it the same way other
people do which leads naturally into
that next thing we may have internalized
as true that was not true which is that
anytime something goes wrong inside of a
relationship it is necessarily our fault
and this often runs so deep for people
who are scapegoated that they have no
idea they hold this belief but what
might continue happening is you might
continue L find yourself having Intimate
Relationships so romantic relationships
or close friendships as you go through
life with people who naturally
externalize blame and then because you
have that natural inclination to go yes
you're right this was my fault when
someone is putting blame on to you you
often don't even have that moment that
the average secure person has where they
check in with themselves and go do I
think that this blame kind of fits the
situation or were some wires getting
crossed here you're more likely to
Simply accept the blame because you have
that deep belief that you are a bad
person who hurts other people without
realizing how and simply apologize or
fawn over the person who is blaming you
and this is of course not to say that
you are faultless for everything that
happens in relationships but it is
definitely true that you are not the
problem 100% of the time in any
relationship there is a dynamic
interplay of how both people are showing
up and both people need to be willing to
adjust the way that they're
communicating with each other for the
relationship to function healthily but
again if you are victim of early
scapegoating it means that you are often
taught that the only way to keep
yourself safe was to comfort and
apologize to the person who is harming
you and the easiest way to lessen the
cognitive dissonance around this is to
internalize that belief that you really
did have intent to hurt this person
every single time even if you don't
really understand why or that doesn't
really make sense to you if you were to
sit down and investigate that belief
it's easier to just internalize I am bad
I am wrong I hurt people by virtue of
who I authentically am and so anytime
something goes wrong in a relationship I
am to blame now the caveat here is that
of course if you have a lot of trauma
you might have a harder time in
relationships than the average person
you might have more triggers you might
have more things that come online that
make healthy relating difficult for you
but this is a significantly different
reality from the reality of I am a bad
person who ruins people's lives and I
feel very passionately about this
because I think it's one that it's so
hard to break the pattern of because you
can always find the exception you can
always find the one thing you did wrong
and go see I knew it it is my fault that
the entire relationship is a mess when
in reality one thing you did wrong is
one thing you did wrong and people do
wrong things chronically in relationship
ship and in a healthy secure Dynamic you
will do things wrong and when you
explain that to your partner they will
not tell you that you are the cause of
all of their unhappiness they will deal
with the one thing you did wrong and you
will heal from it as a pair and you will
move forward and the other person will
also be willing to come to you with
things that they have done wrong and you
will be able to forgive each other but
it will be an equal exchange this is
likely a really hard one to overcome so
I do recommend codependent synonymous
and adult children of alcoholic and
dysfunctional families as free support
groups that exist in most major cities
as well as online that look directly at
how we distort relationships based on
our early experiences and acoa or adult
children of alcoholic and dysfunctional
families actually goes specifically into
family roles and how something like
being scapegoated is going to impact
your experience of intimate
relationships as you grow up so those
are really great free resources that you
can access if you don't have someone
like a counselor or therapist who can
help you unpack all of this stuff or if
you don't have friends and family who
are safe people for you to talk to and
the last thing we're going to go over
when it comes to reconnecting with truth
is this idea that truth in and of itself
is a harmful concept there are of course
better and worse ways to communicate
truth so that it actually gets through
to people and makes the right impact but
truth itself is a completely neutral
concept everything just is the way it is
and there is nothing bad about seeing
things as they are or saying how things
are of course saying how things are
might lead to specific consequences if
as a child you had spoken to Outsiders
about how your family treated you maybe
you would have been either removed from
the family unit or you would have been
severely punished by the people inside
of the family unit or that narrative
that was getting pushed on you that you
were crazy might have been doubled down
on so again there can actually be this
kind of fear response that comes up for
people who've experienced early
scapegoating around the truth they may
have internalize that the kind and
pro-social thing to do the way to get by
in the world is to lie through your
teeth John Bradshaw calls this the no
talk rule in dysfunctional families so
the idea that there is this implicit
contract that anything that is weird or
off in your family does not leave the
family to the outside world everyone
must act as though the family unit is
nice and normal and completely
functional and what's interesting is
that with more secure families you
actually see them being a lot more open
about the things that are going wrong
inside of the family unit and about
things that each individual person is
struggling with so when you're talking
to a secure parent they're likely to be
pretty open about what's happening
inside of the family including which
relational conflicts are happening in a
way that shows that they understand the
complexity of those situations so you
might hear a more secure parent talking
about the conflicts they have with their
kids with an understanding of the
developmental level their child is at as
well as the pressures and challenges
that that child is going through so
maybe they're transitioning into
teenhood and the secure parent is having
a lot more conflict with their child
than they normally would and you're
likely to hear them acknowledge some
form of well that's a really tough age
and in all honesty I'm struggling a bit
with the feeling of them pulling away
from me and so we're both going through
growing pains in our relationship with
each other whereas when you have a
dysfunctional family unit and you have a
parent who is scapegoating one child
what you're going to hear is a lot about
that child's issues and all of the drama
and trouble they are causing for the
family and next to nothing about what
normal challenges that child might be
struggling with the parent might be all
too happy to tell you about all of the
mental illnesses they think their child
has but little to nothing that implies
they are having normal reactions
particularly that they might be having
normal reactions to the parent so you'll
hear a very one-sided narrative and if
you were that scapegoated child you got
so used to hearing that one-sided
narrative that you may never have
learned that there are people who do
prioritize and value the truth inside of
relationship ship and who actually want
to sit down and figure out okay I don't
see something from your point of view so
you tell me what's true for you or what
you perceive to be the truth and I'll
tell you what's true for me or what I
perceive to be the truth and we'll work
together towards a common understanding
this is what in attachment Theory we
call an understanding of complex
causation and it's a characteristic that
comes naturally to secure people they
understand that if there's significant
conflict happening between them and
someone else
there's two sides to it and there is
almost definitely something they're not
seeing as well as something the other
person isn't seeing so resolving
conflict is the act of getting together
and figuring out what the truth that is
being missed in the middle is but again
in these dysfunctional family units
there is an Unwritten rule that there
are things you are not supposed to
acknowledge as true so John bulby the
father of attachment theory has this one
essay that is called on knowing what you
aren't supposed to know and feeling what
you aren't supposed to feel and that
title gets about as close as academic
psychology ever has to deep poetry in my
opinion because it so perfectly and
eloquently captures the challenge of
anyone growing up in a dysfunctional
family system particularly those who are
more in touch with the truth of what's
Happening inside of that system you know
things you are not supposed to know
meaning you know things that you know
you would get in trouble or reprimanded
for knowing and you feel things that you
would be reprimanded or that you feel as
though you are not supposed to feel so
getting back in touch with the truth as
we heal from family scapegoating is the
act of convincing ourselves that there
is nothing we ought not to know and
nothing we ought not to feel knowing
things and feeling things are inherent
parts of our nature nature that we
cannot control we can control of course
what we do with the things we know and
feel but we cannot control the knowing
and the feeling themselves so realigning
ourselves with reality means accepting
that there is nothing inherently bad
about truth which is likely the exact
opposite of what you originally
internalized all right that was the
quality or virtue that I wanted to spend
the most time on that virtue of truth
because I believe that reconnecting to
good
and Beauty are a natural consequence of
starting to live inside of the truth but
this might not be what you believe if
you grw up as the family scapegoat often
in a family that has one child as the
scapegoat there is another child who is
seen as The Golden Child at a first
glance it looks like a favorable role
because the parent who is projecting all
of their own negative qualities onto the
scapegoated child projects all of their
positive qualities onto the golden child
so the gold Olden child is showered with
praise and attention and resource
however the kind of implicit contract
they are given is you must seem Perfect
all of the time you must perfectly
reflect upon me the parent as a perfect
parent you must go out into the world
with all of my values and you must make
me look good to other people and if you
are the scapegoated child you might
think that those are the only two
options options you can be all bad or
you can be all good which may have been
the perception that you had of The
Golden Child in the family because that
was likely the family narrative around
that child that they were all good and
could do no wrong so to start
reconnecting with the goodness inside of
yourself you first have to ditch that
idea that goodness is equivalent to the
appearance of perfection goodness does
not mean that you never make a mistake
but that's what you might think if you
were over punished for every mist
mistake that you make goodness also does
not mean being able to redeem or save
other people but you might believe that
if you were told that you are
responsible for someone else's
unhappiness because what's the flip side
of that belief if you could be
responsible for someone's misery it also
implies that you have the power to make
them perfectly happy and this is likely
a belief that will draw you towards a
ton of codependent relationships later
on if you don't get clear on the truth
the truth is that goodness is not about
perfection and you are not a God who has
the power to magically fix other
people's dysfunction trauma and misery
goodness is simply the act of living in
alignment with truth as much as it's
possible to do so and again this might
feel so wrong to you because what you
were taught is that goodness is about
denying the truth as much as humanly
possible so you might might think the
only way I can ever be good as an adult
is if I can find some way to either
completely erase my past which may
include a history of dysfunctional
relationships addictions antisocial
behaviors all of which again cropped up
as means of you dealing the best way you
knew how with that early scapegoating
you might think the only way I can ever
redeem myself and be good is if I find a
way to distance myself from everything
I've done and present myself as someone
I am not someone who I imagine in my
head when I think about what it means to
be a respectable good citizen for you as
for everybody else in life goodness is
not about detaching from who you are and
the experiences you've had including if
some of the experiences you had were
genuinely quite antisocial goodness is
about getting to the truth of why all of
that happened and living in Integrity so
being willing to say I did X Y and Z and
I understand how that hurt other people
and so I don't do X Y or Z anymore
integrity and goodness is not a
Detachment from what you've done it's a
contextualization of what you've done
which gives you the freedom to decide
how you will behave going forward so you
can live a highly respectable and
virtuous life that includes a long
history of behaviors and experiences
you're not proud of and would not want
to repeat if you you can learn to
understand and contextualize why all of
that happened and have empathy for
yourself now you are bringing yourself
into the world as a person who has much
more empathy than the average person
because you're able to have empathy for
experiences that other people do not
even remotely understand and cannot help
but judge because they have not been
through them themselves and so your
willingness to contextualize Mak sense
of and give yourself empathy for your
own past can end up bringing you into
the world as someone who now has a
superpower so once again fulfilling your
purpose and stepping into your goodness
is not about detaching from yourself
it's about integrating all parts of
yourself and developing the type of
empathy for yourself that you were once
never given I cannot emphasize enough
how rare it is to be able to do that
and how important it is for people to
learn to do that I truly believe this is
one of the most important things that
humans are lacking and on some levels I
even believe we have a social
responsibility to do this kind of
healing work and to find that empathy
for ourselves and to live our lives out
of it because that's the way we become
deeply pro-social people who pass on the
forgiveness and love that we extend to
ourselves to everybody we come in
contact with
and this brings us all the way to that
last transcendental of beauty and once
again when we talk about beauty through
the lens of the transcendentals we're
not just talking about Aesthetics we're
talking about the qualities of Harmony
Clarity and integrity and the argument
is that beauty is that which brings you
in closer to the truth so this is about
an energy that we exude as people who
live in alignment with our own integrity
when we stop abusing ourselves and we
learn to hold ourselves with dignity and
treat our bodies with dignity and treat
other people with respect rather than
with suspicion and guardedness we
instantly become more beautiful versions
of ourselves it doesn't matter if our
physical appearance does not change
there is Beauty in the way that we show
up in the world as people who have
accepted ourselves and who have learned
the practice of Deep empathy so this
means not conforming to what we think
Beauty should look like but really
tuning into ourselves including all of
the pain and challenge we have gone
through in our life and going how do I
display all of that with empathy and
Clarity and in a way that exists in
harmony with other people the most
beautiful way of existing in the world
for someone who has gone through early
scapegoating is to finally begin living
and holding yourself and approaching
relationships as though you are not
sorry for existing because at the core
of the Wounded scapegoat is that belief
I should not exist there is something
wrong with the fact that I exist and
when we actually learn to get in touch
with the truth of who we are and start
fulfilling our purpose and finding our
goodness and reconnecting with the parts
of ourselves that believe actually I do
deserve to live I do deserve to exist
and not only am I not sorry for it I am
grateful for my own existence because I
know that I have transformed all of that
pain I experienced into a commitment to
the truth and to living in harmony with
other people in a non-destructive way
and often what happens is we do
naturally start treating ourselves
better when we have that belief that I
am a good person who deserves to exist
we start feeding ourselves healthy food
that actually facilitate our energy and
our life force
we start engaging with healthier
relationships that highlight the best
qualities within us we choose jobs and
situations to put ourselves in that
allow us to grow into continuously
stronger and more empathetic versions of
ourselves and when we are living like
that we shine but all of this starts
with being willing to reconnect with the
truth and choose to live inside of that
belief that we deserve to be here all
right I'm I'm going to leave that here
for today I do want to note that this is
a really heavy topic because it does
deal with very concerning Early
Childhood experiences for most who've
gone through this so I'm going to leave
some additional resources in the link of
this video I'm not going to leave Mental
Health Resources simply because
depending on where you're tuning in from
in the world your best bet is going to
be doing some Google searches of which
mental health care providers are
available in your region but if any part
of this video was particularly
triggering for you I highly advise
chatting with a mental health
professional in some capacity who can
help you start to integrate your
experiences I also heavily recommend
Rebecca Manville who is an author and a
coach who also runs an excellent YouTube
channel on recovering from Early
Childhood scapegoating I will recommend
a bunch of her stuff in the description
of this video if you want to find out
more and go really deep with this topic
in particular as always I love you guys
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and I will see you back
here again really
soon