hey guys heidi prep here today we are
continuing our series on the
dysfunctional family rules and we will
be talking about the role of the lost
child
so the role of the lost child is one
that ironically it's kind of the hardest
to find information on like when i was
researching the different family roles
all of the chapters about the lost
children were the thinnest chapters all
of the paragraphs and the online
articles about it were the shortest all
of the videos on youtube about it were
the least content rich and i think that
that actually serves as a very
sad but fitting example of the role that
the lost child constantly finds
themselves in in life which is the role
of feeling like a little bit of an
outsider and being afraid to take up
space for themselves so the lost child
is often but not always one of the
younger children in the family so
somewhere around the third or fourth
child and i think that there can be an
exception to this if one or both of the
parents have such a high level of
dysfunction that they're completely
preoccupied by each other so generally
when the lost child enters the family
dynamic there's already a couple of
siblings on the scene maybe they've got
a hero or golden child and a scapegoat
so there is a lot of activity already in
the family there's a lot of action
happening around them and they sort of
feel like there isn't really space for
me here i don't really have the
opportunity to take up room there's
already so much drama and potentially so
much dysfunction happening in the family
unit that it kind of freaks the child
out a little bit right they might have
an older sibling who is a scapegoat and
they might be worried that if i start
acting out or if i start speaking up for
myself the same thing is going to happen
to me that i see happening to the
scapegoat or if the lost child is an
only sibling or if they're the oldest
sibling it might be that one or both of
the parents are either so addicted or so
unwell that there really isn't any time
for either of the parents to focus on
the child so this child learns my best
chance at surviving within this family
unit is to keep to myself to not have
any needs and to be as unassuming and
unintrusive as possible so the lost
child's job in the family is to not
cause any problems so from a very young
age the lost child learns to keep to
themselves stay out of the way and often
they entertain themselves by developing
a really rich inner fantasy world so
they might have a ton of imaginary
friends they might feel like their dolls
or their toys or their actual playmates
or they might just find themselves kind
of tagging along and acting as a third
or fourth wheel to whatever their older
siblings want to do but what the lost
child never really develops is a deep
sense of who they are outside of their
family unit
their role from a very young age is
oriented around blending in not making a
scene and not causing a fuss but that
doesn't leave them a lot of room to
develop their own wants needs interests
hobbies and they often lack the focused
parental guidance to help them develop
those things and this could be by no
major fault of the parent so it's not
necessarily that the parents don't love
the lost child that they don't think
that they're worth spending time or
energy on it could be that but it could
also just be that the parents already
have several kids maybe they're both
working full-time as well as dealing
with some sort of issue with one or both
of the parents they're frazzled they
don't have as much resource necessarily
in the sense of time and energy for this
child so the lost child goes no problem
i will solve that by just being needless
but what's interesting about this role
is that unlike the scapegoat who grows
up with this sense of something wrong is
going on here right they have kind of a
finger on the pulse of the family
dysfunction and they can feel it and
they're angry about it the lost child
assumes that their own dysfunctional
role within the family is their own
fault so whereas the scapegoat will step
up and blame the parents blame the other
siblings blame the family unit for the
reason why they're being discluded the
lost child who is also discluded learns
to blame only themselves and perhaps
this is because the scapegoat takes a
more proactive role in trying to get
family love and attention but they only
really get the focus on them when
they're acting out versus the lost child
sees that behavior and goes ooh i don't
want that to be me so i'm just gonna sit
back and assume that if i stay nice and
quiet nothing bad will happen to me but
there can also be a little bit of an
inferiority complex that develops
because they see the other members of
their family as so active so engaged so
out there and they see themselves as
very reserved very timid there's often a
strong sense of social anxiety that
develops with the lost child and so they
start to believe if i were just more
outgoing or more interesting or if i
took center stage more then i would have
love and attention and belonging they
don't see that the true reason why they
don't have those things in their family
is because the family is dysfunctional
they decide it must be that something's
wrong with them and they withdraw from
other people lest other people find out
about that so there is often a deep
sense of low self-esteem that
accompanies the lost child role
whereas the scapegoat will internalize i
am not okay you are not okay so they
have a negative view of self and
negative view of others the lost child
often develops an anxious attachment
style in which they believe i am not
okay you are okay so they might have a
positive or idealized view of others and
this might be really enriching by the
fact that they have this vivid inner
fantasy world in which they're creating
these fantasy bonds and relationships
with other people inside their own minds
but they believe that the reason why
they can't find those connections in
real life must be because something is
wrong with them they're not good enough
they're not loud enough they're not
interesting or outgoing enough and so
there can be this real sense of putting
oneself down as the lost child but the
outside world doesn't necessarily notice
that because they aren't loud about it
they don't announce what they believe
their shortcomings to be they just kind
of withdraw and marinate on it on their
own so as a child the lost child often
deals with a very intense sense of
loneliness and separation but again they
aren't necessarily vocal about that so
others wouldn't necessarily know that's
what's going on however when they enter
school age they will often experience
trouble connecting with the other kids
early on in their family they learned
that following not leading was their
best chance of surviving without too
many scars so this is usually the stance
that they take when it comes to their
social environment at school as they
grow up in romantic relationships they
want a sense of guidance from other
people that comes from outside of
themselves so they might really struggle
to be proactive when it comes to
relationships
so that sense of loneliness and
disconnection that they feel in
childhood often follows the lost child
into adulthood and a problem that kind
of fuses with this is that because the
lost child never really learned to
engage with their own interests to
figure out what they like and don't like
and what they're passionate about and
motivated by in life there's often a
lack of direction that the lost child
feels so they're not really sure which
careers they want to pursue or which
relationships they want to invest in
there's kind of an ambivalence they can
develop towards choosing any specific
path and often you will see the lost
child continuing to live with their
parents maybe long after most of their
peers have moved out because they
struggle with the sense of
self-direction that leaving the nest and
thriving on their own would require them
to have so in a way the lost child is
the child that is kind of limited the
most in terms of resource often the
family resources of time and attention
even money will be poured predominantly
into the golden child if there's a
golden child in the family dynamic and a
close second might be the hero because
the hero is so achievement-oriented so
they will proactively pursue resources
and ask the parents for help in funding
whatever it is that they want to try and
achieve and the scapegoat though most of
the attention that's on them is negative
might also get a lot of resource in
terms of time and attention and energy
because they're acting out so much that
the parent needs to focus a lot of
attention on them and that leaves the
lost child with not a lot left over so
the skills that their siblings develop
might not be something that ever really
gets developed in them they'll be less
likely to seek out new opportunities to
take risks to assert their wants and
needs and as a result they won't
necessarily build many skills that will
eventually help them in the real world
so as an adult you'll often find that
the lost child is kind of looking to
other people for guidance as though
other people are their parent figures
because they did not get that firm
gentle guidance that they needed as a
child so there's still a part of them as
an adult that's looking outward for it
and again this is something that you
often see with the anxious attachment
style they want a sense of guidance that
comes from outside of themselves they're
seeking less for a partner and more for
a stand-in caregiver in the form of a
partner when they become adults and of
course this is all unconscious but it's
nonetheless there and the lost child's
route to getting better is definitely an
interesting one because lost children
can if they allow themselves to respond
very well to therapeutic intervention
because someone like a therapist a coach
a guidance counselor can provide them
with that sense of structure and
inherent interest and engagement with
them that they never got as a child and
that can actually be very healing we do
all need positive role models and lost
children specifically because they do
tend to look up to other people who they
believe to be authorities can be like
sponges when they get the right
information in their hands right but
lost children are also one of the least
likely roles to seek out counseling
because their problems are persistent
but low grade so unlike the scapegoat
who's acting out tends to get them into
trouble because they display antisocial
behaviors the lost child might struggle
but their coping mechanisms will always
fly a little bit under the radar like
you might see substance abuse but very
low-grade substance abuse not enough to
really raise any red flags for people
you might see low-grade dissatisfaction
low-grade lack of ambition and those
things might eventually give way to a
sense of depression but all of the
problems for the lost child tend to feel
very subtle and because there's already
that devaluation of self the lost child
tends to convince themselves nothing's
really wrong i'm overreacting i don't
need therapy these problems aren't real
and this perfectly matches the mindset
that they adopted to get through their
childhood right minimize the problems
don't make a fuss find a way to
dissociate instead of proactively
solving them because there can actually
be a bit of a fear response involved in
the lost child speaking up right maybe
as a child they saw their older siblings
speaking up and then they saw them
getting hit or getting punished for
speaking their minds and so the very
thought of speaking up and asserting
themselves and stating what they want
can actually be accompanied by a freeze
response and a very instinctual desire
to withdraw so the route to healing for
the lost child is going to lie in
learning to take their own emotional
experiences seriously now the cool thing
is that the lost child already has this
very rich inner world right they have
spent a lot of time fantasizing a lot of
time creating this world inside of their
minds where they might have these
visions of who they want to be the
problem is that they don't trust
themselves to become that in the real
world but the route to healing for the
lost child absolutely lies in learning
to take up space it lies in tuning in to
what they believe they want even if they
feel themselves second guessing it and
deciding that they deserve to take up
space in that area that they deserve an
opportunity to pursue it that they
deserve to speak up about what they want
and what they want to go for in life and
confidence will build as the action
steps begin to happen
and confidence will build for the lost
child as they start to see that they are
capable of making good decisions for
themselves they are capable in deciding
on a goal and pursuing it and reaping
the rewards they are capable of taking
up steadily more and more space for
themselves and what's more other people
might be very happy to see them doing so
now disclaimer like with any of the
family roles you have likely oriented
your entire life if you are a lost child
around certain types of relationships so
with a lot of anxiously attached
individuals and also for a lot of lost
children there can be a sense of feigned
helplessness so what this means is as a
young child if the lost child only got
attention from their caregivers when
they were showing them look i can't do
something i really need your help this
trait can actually follow them into
adulthood and there can be this tendency
to present oneself as kind of helpless
and in need of guidance and that can
attract a lot of caretaking
personalities right so when you start to
step out of this role and start to
assert yourself and start to draw your
own boundaries this actually might
threaten some of the people in your life
unconsciously whether they're aware of
it or not they might feel like oh no i
am invested in caretaking this person
and helping this person solve their
problems so if they're solving their own
problems what am i going to do and then
they might unconsciously try to kind of
put you back in that helpless role so
that's something to be aware of and
prepared for
and the good news is that if those
relationships are healthy and all of
this is happening unconsciously only for
the other person having a simple
discussion might help with that so you
can sit people down and let them know
i'm going to be trying more things on my
own i'm going to be drawing more
boundaries i'm going to be taking up
more space in this area and i'm not
looking for the same type of help or
guidance that i used to be looking for
maybe now what i need from you is just
to encourage me and to support me and to
show up and clap when i'm winning and
that might be a very different dynamic
than the people in your life are used to
but then it's their choice whether to
consciously adjust to that or not and
even though your entire life you have
considered it your responsibility to
make yourself small enough that there's
room for everyone else this process will
be a process of unlearning that that is
what you're supposed to do right you as
much as anyone else deserve to take up
space deserve to pursue the things that
you're interested in or that you
fantasize about and you deserve to go
out on limbs and make mistakes and learn
from them and it can be extraordinarily
helpful to get professional help whether
that's from a therapist or a coach to
help you hone those skills that you
never really learned in childhood but
also make sure that the professional
that you go to is someone who you
actually feel like is a good fit for you
so there can be this tendency with the
lost child again to outsource authority
and not listen to the inner wisdom
that's telling them ooh this maybe isn't
the best fit or maybe i should shop
around a little bit more and get a
therapist who i feel more connected to
it's an important decision so this is
the first time when you really need to
start trusting your gut alright that's
all i have to say about the lost child
for today let me know in the comments if
this is a role that you relate to i'm
very curious about how the family roles
show up for you guys and until next time
i love you guys i hope you're taking
care of yourself and come back here
later this week for more in this series
[Music]
you