hey guys heidi preeb here today we are
continuing the series of dysfunctional
family rolls i just want to acknowledge
at this point
that i committed to wearing one shirt
for this entire series
it's not that i only have one shirt i
just have realized that most youtubers
have a very large wardrobe that i do not
have because fashion makes me want to
gouge my eyes out so this is my family
rolls shirt and also my several other
topics shirt it just felt like time to
acknowledge that you know so we're all
on the same page anyway today we are
talking about the golden child role so
this role similar to the scapegoat is
one of the more extreme dysfunctional
family rules because it's not just about
how the child adapts to the family
dysfunction though it's also about that
it is a role that the parent projects
onto the child that can be quite intense
so earlier in this series we talked
about the scapegoat role which is the
role that the child plays when one of
the parents projects all of their own
negative qualities onto that child and
the golden child is kind of the inverse
of this role so with a golden child you
have a child who the parent projects all
of their own positive qualities onto a
lot of the time i see the golden child
role talked about in relation to
narcissism it's also the year of our
lord 2021 so i hear literally everything
talked about in relation to narcissism
but you don't necessarily have to have a
narcissistic parent to have a golden
child in the family you can
you certainly can but that's not the
only way again any sort of family
dysfunction can cause these family roles
to start taking form but the role of the
golden child does have a kind of
narcissistic payoff for the parent so
basically this is the child who has some
quality for whatever reason that the
parent really identifies with and maybe
really wants to believe they have as
well so this might be the child who has
a particular talent that the parent
always wished they had or that they had
realized within themselves it could be
the child who shares a similar demeanor
or code of ethics to the parents it
could just be whichever child is the
most compliant and who conforms the most
fully to the parents worldview but
whatever it is there is this connection
that the parent makes between themselves
and the child in their own mind where
they start to see the child less as
their own independent individual and
more as kind of an extension of the
parents own best qualities or the
qualities that the parent would like to
believe and perhaps delude themselves
into thinking that they have so the
golden child and the hero might be the
same family role they might not be if
the parent really values and identifies
personally with a sense of achievement
orientation then the hero might be the
most likely candidate to also be the
golden child however not all parents are
particularly achievement oriented and
remember the golden child is the child
that the parent sees as kind of an
extension of themselves so let's say the
parent really likes to see themselves as
a good and virtuous person in that case
whichever child most conforms to the
parents moral code might become the
golden child if the parent likes to see
themselves as very attractive whichever
child who they think is the best looking
or the most cute might be the golden
child but in the same vein let's say the
parent was the family scapegoat of their
family they might pick the most
rebellious or kind of edgy child to be
the golden child because again they're
picking traits that they see as their
own positive traits or at the least the
traits that they have the most ego
around and that's what they're
identifying in the child now the golden
child's role in the family quickly
becomes being a mini me for their parent
so the golden child understands from a
very young age that they will receive
preferential treatment from their parent
and this could come in the form of extra
emotional attention on them it could
come in the form of extra resources so
they might be given opportunities or
encouraged to try for things that the
other siblings are not given it could
just be preferential treatment in terms
of rules so they might not get punished
as much or as readily as the other
siblings and the golden child kind of
understands there's a deal going on here
as long as i reflect my parent back to
them through my actions i will get
preferential treatment over the other
members of the family and there is often
a sense of identification that they feel
with the parent so from a very young age
the golden child might feel like they're
a little bit more like a parent in the
family than the children and the reason
they feel this way is because the parent
who's projecting their positive
qualities onto this child also kind of
doesn't see this child as a child in the
mind of the parent the golden child is
much more adult-like than the other
children and this can get murky you can
have situations where the parent is
treating the child inappropriately like
an adult so they might confide in the
golden child in a way that isn't quite
appropriate for a parent-child
relationship they might feel like they
are emotionally closer or have more in
common with this child than they do
their spouse and start almost treating
the child like their secure base instead
of vice versa this is something that
psychologists call emotional incest not
to be confused with sexual abuse which
of course can also be present in any of
these roles but that is certainly not
inherent to any of them so the golden
child will grow up with this feeling of
being extremely special of feeling
chosen and better than other people but
that leaves them with this very immense
pressure to fill in the shoes that have
been assigned to them there can be this
pervasive sense that they must perform
and they must conform to whatever it is
that their parents praise them for in
order to get love so the authentic self
who they truly are their true wants
their true interests their true needs
and desires they learn to cut themselves
off from in favor of pleasing the parent
and to the other children in the family
this might look like a very enviable
role because the golden child truly does
get special treatment they get
opportunities granted to them they get
attention that the other children don't
get however this comes at the cost of
the golden child disconnecting from
themselves right all children need to
have their true inner worlds seen and
acknowledged and encouraged in order to
grow into emotionally healthy adults but
in the case of the golden child who they
truly are isn't really of interest to
the parent how they make the parent look
and how they come off to other people is
of extreme interest to the parent so if
the parent is particularly religious the
golden child might get their validation
and maintain their sense of importance
in the family by becoming extremely
religious as well and showing up as an
upstanding member of the community in
the church if the parent has a
rebellious or anti-social streak the
golden child might start behaving in
anti-social ways to make the parent
proud of them the dream of the parent
who's raising a golden child is that
other people will see that child as a
direct reflection of the parents own
best qualities so there is a sense of
association that they have to have with
this child in order to feed their own
sense of self-esteem and the child can
feel the immensity of this pressure that
is resting on them right providing your
parent with a sense of self-esteem and
self-worth is an incredible job that
should absolutely never be put on a
child but in this case the parent is
unconsciously outsourcing the majority
of their self-worth to this child so in
some ways the golden child has it kind
of easy in the family the other siblings
are often very jealous of the golden
child because the family in many
respects kind of revolves around this
one individual any game or performance
or event that they're involved in the
parents will almost without fail attend
and support in some way that might not
be the same treatment the other children
get there may be more time or money or
resource funneled into this child
because the parent sees a greater
opportunity for them and doesn't
necessarily nurture the ambitions of the
other children in the same way and in
the realist sense of the term the golden
child grows up with a kind of spotlight
on them in the family and the golden
child certainly feels this they know
that that spotlight is on them but they
rationalize it by telling themselves
some version of well i must have just
done something right i must just be a
little bit intellectually or physically
superior to the other children in the
family and you cannot blame the golden
child for feeling this way because they
have been conditioned to believe that
there's something superior about them
from a very young age so this can go in
a couple of directions for the golden
child one direction it can go in is they
can genuinely develop a bit of a sense
of narcissism they can start to believe
i can do no wrong because their parents
have been reacting to them for the
majority of their lives as though they
do no wrong and it's possible depending
on whether or not the circumstances of
their lives conform to that belief that
they spend the rest of their lives with
that vague sense of superiority right
now when the golden child grows up
they're often going to have a lot of
difficulty relating to other people
healthily because they are so used to
praise and special treatment they may
find it incredibly difficult to be in
any environment where they are not
constantly seen as the shining star so
they may over extend themselves and
become workaholics in order to continue
to get the praise that they are used to
receiving and there will often be an
internalized sense of narcissism that
will make them incredibly sensitive to
feedback the golden child is often not
used to getting feedback that is
negative in any capacity so when they
grow up and enter the adult world they
might seem very cool and collected on
the surface but react in almost a very
childlike way when they receive any
criticism whatsoever in the golden
child's mind they are safe and okay only
insofar as they are being praised and
favored by authority figures so they'll
often go to extreme lengths to make sure
that they are not being criticized in
any way and that they are in favorable
positions in both their professional and
personal lives now if they can't
maintain that stable sense of validation
that they're used to getting as an adult
the golden child can also turn to
addictive behaviors for self-soothing so
they might compulsively overeat to
soothe the shame that they feel inside
of not getting that validation they
might gamble they might abuse substances
subtly enough that people don't notice
but enough that it kind of numbs out
that sense of anxiety and shame that
they feel and with golden children well
into adulthood you tend to see a pattern
of kind of rigid thinking and rigid
beliefs because very young again they
learn to disconnect from their emotional
experience which is what helps us
navigate the gray areas in life and they
learn to internalize a very specific set
of rules that they believed would bring
them love and approval and connection
and belonging because in their family
system that was how it worked so the
kind of tragedy of the golden child is
that similar to the hero they don't
necessarily know what it takes to make
true connections with people because
their vulnerabilities and their
challenges and their pain was never
really seen or acknowledged growing up
they might find that as an adult they
only really know how to have surface
level relationships where they're
praised or approved of but they're not
necessarily supported the love that they
receive from other people like the love
that they receive from their parents is
conditional upon them following the
rigid rules that they've internalized
very strictly those rules might tell
them you have to be an upstanding member
of your community or you won't be loved
or accepted it might tell them you have
to do everything right the first time or
else you won't be loved or accepted it
might tell them you have to make a
certain amount of money or raise your
family in a certain way or show up in a
certain way in your church or community
that brings pride into the family or
else you will be rejected so the
pressure that was put on them in
childhood the golden child will often
internalize and perpetuate within
themselves into their adult years or a
couple of other things can happen so one
thing that can happen is that the golden
child starts to realize at some point
that there is not a really good reason
why they're getting preferential
treatment so they might start to see the
family dynamic for what it is and often
this will begin with kind of a gnawing
sense of guilt so maybe they'll really
notice in some moment ooh i'm getting
treated very differently in the exact
same situation as someone else and that
doesn't feel particularly fair to me
often the golden child will actually be
enlisted by the parent to co-abuse or
co-bully maybe the scapegoat of the
family and the experience of witnessing
or participating in abuse can actually
be traumatizing for the golden child
themselves so there may be these moments
where they start to kind of see cracks
in the armor of their parent but there's
a predicament that this puts the golden
child in because from a very young age
this child has learned to cut off their
own authentic wants needs feelings and
desires and conform to whoever the
parent wants them to be so not always
but often you'll have a golden child
with an avoidant attachment style
because they have disconnected from that
sense of self and their true needs and
their true feelings very early on and
learn to simply respond to who others
want them to be on the surface and so if
they're not living up to these
expectations of the parents they're not
necessarily sure who they are and some
golden children will go on to try to
explore that they will grow up and leave
the nest and do some identity
exploration and maybe they'll start to
realize ooh there was something up with
my parent maybe the parent starts
getting really annoying a lot of the
time when golden children grow up and
leave the house the parent is distressed
by their leaving and they might find
that they're getting constant calls
constant visits from their parents and
they might want a little bit of space
the golden child also might really
struggle to set boundaries with their
parent who will become needier and
needier as they age when someone has
dysfunctional or narcissistic traits it
is unlikely that they will get less
needy as they grow up if anything the
more raw and vulnerable and needy they
feel the more they will project onto
their golden child and the more that
they will feel like they need the golden
child's support and narcissistic supply
in return so as this parent ages they
might become increasingly clingy to the
golden child and the golden child might
start realizing i have to set some
serious boundaries with this parent
which might be difficult to do because
unconsciously their entire sense of self
is oriented around pleasing and not
upsetting their parent however the more
the golden child steps into their own
authentic identity and sheds the traits
that they've taken on on behalf of their
parent the more the parent becomes upset
with them so many golden children go
through what we call a fall from grace
where the parent who once projected all
of their positive qualities onto them
then gets offended by them either
pulling away or starting to express
their more authentic self and then they
will begin to scapegoat that child and
this is of course very disorienting for
the golden child because their entire
lives they've been treated one way and
they believed that was by virtue of
their character because that's what
they've been told and then all of a
sudden they're being treated the way the
rest of the children in their family
were treated which can lead them to
either start scrambling to get that
parental affection and attention back or
it can cause them to push themselves
further and further away from the parent
in the family unit or they might
oscillate between those two strategies
but in any case the golden child who
begins developing an awareness of what
was truthfully going on in their family
dynamic will likely be riddled by
extreme guilt they might start
recognizing that there was no real
reason why they got treated differently
than their siblings they might start
recognizing that the siblings who were
scapegoated didn't necessarily deserve
that unequal treatment and it might
truly take the parent reacting to them
the way that they always saw that parent
reacting to other children to realize
the parent is the common denominator in
this behavior it's not that i am morally
superior it's not that i was born with a
better or more elevated soul it's that
my parent is unwell and for a long time
i was in their spotlight but the
spotlight can turn off just as quickly
now if this is a role that you find
yourself in professional help is going
to be incredibly important this is what
i say for every single role but it is
particularly true for the golden child
and the scapegoat both of whom have
endured severe projection from their
parents and disconnected from their
sense of self in a very major way
learning how to have healthy
relationships with other people where
you are seen for your faults for your
mistakes and you're supported when you
fall down and need to try again is a
process that is going to take time to
learn it is difficult to unlearn a
pattern of praise being equivalent to
love and it's especially difficult if
there is a fall from grace that happens
and you go from golden child to
scapegoat and if that fall from grace
happens for you there are two possible
routes to take one is to continue to
seek that validation that narcissistic
supply the grandiose sense of importance
that your parent has been feeding you
from a young age in other people and
attempt to get that validation from
somewhere else in your life
the second route is to do the hard work
of recognizing that the reason you were
treated differently is not because you
are inherently superior or morally
superior to the other children in your
family it's because your parent was
unwell and there is some projections
that they placed on to you that placed
extreme pressure on you to never make a
mistake to never make them look bad to
never get something wrong in life and
that the normal world does not require
you to never make a mistake there are
ways to achieve belonging and safety and
connection without impressing others and
it might be particularly helpful to find
a counselor who can work with you by
either directly addressing family roles
or by looking at attachment theory
because chances are if you were the
golden child you didn't learn healthy
attaching and you might really struggle
with true intimacy true self-referencing
if you don't know who you really are
beneath the veneer that you present to
the outside world it's going to be
really hard to form secure supportive
relationships and so the golden child
just like the scapegoat really needs the
help of an enlightened witness so a
therapist or someone who understands
family roles who can help them properly
contextualize the environment that they
grew up in and adjust their expectations
for the real world to be more realistic
otherwise there can be a very deep sense
of self-criticism of depression
of anxiety that follows them through the
remainder of their lives so if you
recognize yourself in this role it is
going to be immensely important that you
get yourself support sooner rather than
later all right i think that's all for
the golden child for today if you
recognize yourself in this role let me
know in the comments i'm really curious
about which roles you guys are seeing
yourselves in if you see yourself in
multiple roles that's very common by the
way the roles do shift around as family
dynamics change and often one child will
play multiple roles particularly if
there is not that many kids in the
family so the larger the family the more
the roles can be dispersed the smaller
the family the more likely certain
children are to take on multiple roles
so any questions also let me know below
i'll answer as many as i can and as
always i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and i will see
you back here again soon
[Music]
you