hey guys heidi preep here today we are
continuing the series on family rolls
and i wanted to
address the topic of family scapegoating
with a lot of kind of safety cones
around it because of all the family
roles this is the family role that is
the most likely to have experienced
abuse at the hands of their family
members psychological abuse is kind of
inherent to the role so if you were
scapegoated by your family you were
psychologically abused the term
scapegoating is a term that describes
psychological abuse and there may also
have been other forms of abuse present
so i just want to start out by saying
that if you recognize yourself in this
role and if you recognize yourself as
dealing with the problems that i'm going
to go over in the rest of this video i
highly highly highly highly recommend
seeing a therapist or mental health
professional who can help you understand
and work through some of the issues that
you're probably facing as an adult in
this role so i am going to give
suggestions as we go through there are
lots of different types of therapy or
lots of different support groups you
could seek out there are books that i
really love that deal very specifically
and directly with family scapegoating as
well as with some of the mental health
conditions that might come alongside it
but i just wanted to start this out by
noting that this is a kind of serious
and somber topic today like a lot of
personality systems that we talk about
are kind of fun and upbeat and we're
celebrating our strengths but
dysfunctional family roles focus more on
what went really wrong so today's video
might be a little bit triggering for
some people because again family
scapegoating is a form of abuse and
discovering this role and the fact that
you fit into it might be the first time
that you have that language for what
you've gone through which can in and of
itself be a very disorienting experience
so
take care of yourself while you're
watching this video while you're
exploring these terms and if you can try
to seek out a mental health professional
who works with these roles and can help
you understand and contextualize what
happened to you within them now in the
last video where i introduced the family
roles we talked very briefly about what
each one of them is but today i want to
go a lot deeper with the role of the
family scapegoat and talk about how it
shows up in childhood how it shows up in
adulthood and how if you recognize
yourself to be in this role as an adult
you can navigate it with a little bit
more clarity and consciousness and end
the cycle of putting yourself
continuously in situations where you are
being scapegoated so first let's do an
overview and go a little bit more in
depth as to what the scapegoat is so a
dysfunctional family system can be
thought of as a family system that
serves the emotional needs of the
parents above and before the needs of
the child this is often called a
narcissistic family however i don't love
using that term because it's a little
bit misleading you don't need to have
someone with narcissistic personality
disorder in the family in order for it
to follow this pattern of dysfunction
but it will most often show up when
there is a parent who has some level of
narcissism to them however again that
doesn't mean that they have npd it could
be that they have another cluster b
disorder in which narcissism is kind of
a co-occurring trait so a lot of the
time this looks like a parent who had
severe abuse in their own childhood who
never properly healed from it and didn't
learn proper emotional regulation
strategies so their responses to their
own children are very disoriented and
very confusing for the child that parent
might not be classified as having
narcissistic personality disorder but
the reason we call it a narcissistic
family is because the system itself is
oriented around ensuring that the
emotional needs of the parent are either
met or at the least not severely
triggered as opposed to the parent
taking complete responsibility for their
own emotional regulation as well as the
parental responsibility of meeting the
physical and emotional needs of the
children so the role of the family
scapegoat is the role of the child who
one or more of the parents projects all
of their own negative qualities onto so
let's say you have a parent who has
really intense rage issues because maybe
they have unhealed trauma or they have
an attachment style that they have never
found the proper coping strategies for
but that parent can't deal with the fact
that they have extreme raid because it
isn't compatible with the image they
have of themselves in their head of them
being a good and loving parent so if
they fly off the handle and start
screaming at one of their children they
might tell themselves to justify that
it's because this kid is just a bad
apple this kid is the reason i get so
angry it must be the fault of the child
that i have these rage issues or this
drinking issue or these problems at work
so instead of looking inward and
figuring out why they're experiencing so
much emotional difficulty the parent
will project all of that difficulty onto
one child and decide that if it were not
for this child they would not have any
of these problems now you might have a
parent in this case who has borderline
personality disorder or something
similar and they might engage in
splitting so splitting is when you can
only see people in a certain
circumstance as all good or all bad and
often people who suffer from extreme
emotional regulation difficulties will
split a singular person so one day their
boyfriend or their partner is the
absolute best person in the world and
the next day they're the absolute worst
and they can do no right but in
dysfunctional family systems what we
often see is a splitting between
children so you will have the scapegoat
whom the parent projects all of their
negative qualities onto and that child
can do no right but you will also have
the golden child who the parent projects
all of their positive qualities onto and
that child can do no wrong and again
this often happens because the parent
may have been a victim of abuse or
trauma and so they developed a very very
black or white thinking about people
they do believe in their own mindset
people are all good or all bad and they
project this onto their children instead
of seeing them as imperfect but lovable
human beings who are doing the best that
they can so there isn't necessarily an
even tempered view of people people are
all one way or another so in these
family systems where you have both a
golden child and a scapegoat the parent
treats these children almost entirely
different everything the golden child
does is considered wonderful and perfect
and a brilliant reflection of the
parents own positive qualities and
everything the scapegoat does is
considered bad and not good enough and a
reflection of everything the parent
hates about themselves so they are
viewing their perception to see one
child as flawless and another child as
inherently flawed but the problem is
that there is also a gaslighting process
that happens so the parent usually
cannot admit to themselves i love one
child more than the other or i value one
child more than the other or i see my
children as unequal in my own mind so
what they tell themselves to compensate
for this split is that one child is just
a bad child they love all of their
children equally it just so happens that
one of them is really good and the other
one is really bad and this is the
message that they tell their children so
you often with scapegoating abuse have a
very disorienting scenario where
children are being treated very
differently but they're being told i
treat you all the same i love you all
the same i respect you all the same and
the reason that you're getting worse
treatment is just because you're a bad
person in the book the fantasy bond by
robert firestone he talks about how it
would actually be better for abused
children to be told i don't love you by
the parent who's abusing them rather
than being told i love you and then
suffering abuse at the hands of that
parent whether it's physical or
psychological or emotional abuse because
children believe what they're told so if
a child is being told i love you and
then they're having things projected
onto them they're being told they're a
bad person they're being told that they
are the reason mommy or daddy is so
angry mommy or daddy drinks whatever it
is the child will learn to fuse abuse
and love they believe what is happening
to me is love and the only logical
explanation that a child can come up
with in most cases for why they are
being abused by someone who loves them
so much is that they are inherently
flawed and a bad person so scapegoated
children tend to believe on a very deep
level like something is just wrong with
them they were born into the world with
a bad soul that was flawed and kind of
messed up and now anyone who gets too
close to them is going to be able to see
that now if the child had just been
overtly told i don't love you i am not
treating you the same as your other
siblings i am projecting all of my own
issues onto you the child would at least
know what's up and of course this would
never happen this is highly highly
unrealistic because the parent
themselves usually can't admit to
themselves or has no awareness of the
fact that they're scapegoating the child
right they really do believe this child
is just a bad kid but if the child were
to have been aware of all of that they
would at least know this is not what
love is this is not what love feels like
this is not what it means to be loved by
someone because as we'll talk about in a
little bit the scapegoated child often
grows up to have extremely dysfunctional
relationships where they really are not
able to discern what loving behavior is
and is not so what's interesting is that
this deeply internalized wound of
believing i am bad that is inherent to
the scapegoated child is also inherent
to the fearful avoidant attachment style
so the difference between let's say the
anxious attachment style and the fearful
avoidant is that the anxious attachment
style is often pretty convinced of their
own innocence so they tend to believe
everyone else is treating me badly but i
should be treated well i do deserve to
have a different kind of love and this
isn't to be confused with having high
self-esteem often the anxious attachment
style has low self-esteem but they see
their problems as external the problem
with the fearful avoidance is that
they've internalized the way people
treat them and they truly do believe at
their core in most cases i am a bad
person i am evil i was born into this
world with something wrong with me and
anyone who gets close to me is gonna see
that so the fearful avoidance have a
negative view of self and also a
negative view of others and this often
parallels the experience of the
scapegoat who believes that i'm the
reason i'm being abused but also other
people are unstable unpredictable and i
can't trust them so there's a sense of
not being able to trust the self and
also not being able to trust other
people and again this mirrors the
experience of the fearful avoidant who
has that i am not okay you are not okay
world view now this doesn't mean that
all scapegoats are fearful avoidant it
does not mean that all fearful avoidance
were scapegoated however there is often
a very strong overlap between these two
categories i believe it was pia melody
who does awesome work in the field of
love addiction and codependency who
paralleled the family roles with the
attachment styles and she found that
scapegoat and fearful avoidant was one
of the most likely combinations that you
would see so the last thing i want to
note about the childhood of the
scapegoat is that often the entire
family unit is oriented against this one
child so the parent who's doing the
scapegoating often enlists the help of
the other children by telling them that
this child is just the problem child
they're the reason they're not a nice
normal family and the other children
develop a sense of animosity towards the
scapegoated child in particular the
golden child might be enlisted to bully
the scapegoated child alongside the
parent and we'll talk about this more
when i do a video on the golden child
specifically but they will often grow up
feeling intensely guilty and remorseful
on some level for the way that they
treated the scapegoated child they may
experience second-hand trauma from being
enlisted to help in the abuse of another
child or they may spend their lives
rationalizing why this was okay because
the other kid was just a bad kid unlike
them they were a good kid there's
actually a really incredible scene in
the tv show this is us where you see
this exact dynamic play out so you see
randall who plays the golden child
explode on kevin the scapegoated child
telling him that his childhood was rosy
everything was great that he has nothing
to complain about and that the issues
with addiction he developed as an adult
he was just doing to get attention and i
don't want to throw the blame onto the
golden child here i don't think that's
helpful because the golden child is
often completely brainwashed by the
parent and they're simply reacting to
what they've been taught from a very
very young age they have a different
core wound that we're going to talk
about when we get to their video but it
tends to be extremely disorienting for
the family scapegoat because they are
treated like they are crazy in the
family any time they point at the abuse
and call it what it is so if the
scapegoated child starts telling the
parent that they're acting unfairly if
the scapegoated child tells anyone
outside of the family that the parent is
acting unfairly what will happen is that
the entire family will kind of rally up
and accuse the scapegoat of being crazy
so the scapegoat might come to be known
as kind of the problem child as the
child who maybe is mentally ill in some
way they might get different diagnoses
they're the most likely child to be
brought in for psychological help
because the parents truly believe we're
a nice normal family nothing is wrong
with us it's just this one kid is acting
up and we don't know why the reason the
kid is acting up of course is because
they are being blamed shamed abused for
things that the parent is projecting
onto them and it's perfectly reasonable
for a child to act up in response to
that and again the child doesn't have
the language for this right they can't
point at the parent and say you're
gaslighting me you are projecting your
own abuse onto me you are threatened by
me because you yourself have an unhealed
disorganized attachment system the child
just knows i am on the receiving end of
a large amount of negative emotion
whether that's shame whether that's
anger whether that's neglect and there
doesn't seem to be a rhyme or reason to
why it happens so this is of course very
disregulating for the child when they're
being blamed for something that doesn't
really make any sense of course it's a
normal child reaction to get really
angry really upset really frustrated and
then it becomes easy for the rest of the
family to point the finger at the child
and say well look at how much they're
acting out this must be their fault so
there is absolutely in the purest sense
of the term a lifelong gaslighting
process that happens with the
scapegoated child they are continuously
being told you are the reason why we
weren't a nice normal family you are the
one with anger issues you are the one
who is a bad kid and this process of
gaslighting them will often follow them
in the family dynamic all the way
through to adulthood so in the adult's
life there are a lot of different ways
that the outcomes of this scapegoating
abuse can play out you will
unfortunately very often see the
scapegoated child developing issues with
addiction with emotional regulation they
might deal with eating disorders or
other mental illnesses it is not
uncommon for scapegoats to develop
complex ptsd which is a disorder that
develops through prolonged interpersonal
abuse and it's possible that all of
these mental health conditions will go
unnoticed or untreated because the
scapegoat doesn't see them as mental
health conditions they see them as a
natural extension of themselves and who
they are is a bad person so of course
they have all of these problems i have a
theory and this is purely speculation
loosely based on personal experience
that scapegoats often get involved in
kind of anti-social behaviors like drugs
or crime or whatever it is because they
have internalized this feeling of i am
bad and so when you believe you are a
bad person when you are presented with a
scenario where a bad person would say
yes to it you kind of go well i'm the
kind of person who is bad and this is
the scenario a bad person would like so
i fit here and so you'll kind of see
them turning to these anti-social
tendencies not because they necessarily
want to but because it fits with their
self-perception the scapegoat has this
very deep feeling of i'm not like other
people i am bad i'm broken i'm flawed so
when they meet other people who are kind
of on the fringes of society so maybe
someone who is a drug addict maybe
someone who is involved in some sort of
crime they might almost see that person
as a mirror and go oh here's another
person who's bad and broken and flawed
like me and there can actually be a
sense of camaraderie and acceptance that
they never felt in their family unit
when they meet other bad people so this
can lead the scapegoat down a lot of
very scary paths because they've kind of
divided the world into good and bad
people and they identify as bad in the
worst case scenario this can lead them
to go on to perpetuate cycles of abuse
now you might not necessarily see
antisocial behavior in adult scapegoats
but what you will almost always see is a
pattern of adult relationships that are
incredibly dysfunctional because the
scapegoat never learned what love is and
they have this very convoluted idea in
their head of when someone loves you
they also blame you they project onto
you they get angry at you for things you
don't quite understand so they might end
up in a lot of partnerships where they
are being blamed and shamed by their
partners for things that aren't really
theirs to take on but that that part of
them that believes that they are
inherently bad and just ruin the lives
of other people around them but they
don't understand why feels very
validated right so i'm going to slow
that down and say it again
the family scapegoat as a child comes to
believe that something inside of them is
broken and bad and that if anyone gets
close to them and really sees them and
really knows them they will accidentally
make that person angry make that person
abuse them make that person behave badly
so scapegoats might be at a very high
risk for ending up in abusive
relationships in adulthood because this
becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy if
someone begins treating them the way
that their parent treated them they
believed well it must be because they
got close enough to me that this thing
inside of me that's just inherently bad
caused them to become so angry to be
abusive towards me and this can go on
and on forever because the scapegoat
doesn't realize that they are not
inherently broken they really think they
are so they don't have the same red
flags go off when they get into
relationships that other people do
because they believe that any abuse they
suffer is their own fault now this
dynamic is not helped out by the fact
that the family usually continues to
scapegoat this child well into adulthood
so when you have a dysfunctional family
system unless something really drastic
happens the family usually just
continues to function using its
unconscious roles until all the family
members are dead like save for a giant
intervention and sometimes it takes one
child kind of waking up to the
dysfunction of the family for that
change to start taking place the roles
probably aren't going to change they
might become more sophisticated and the
people involved might find more and more
complex ways to play out these roles in
socially acceptable forms but more often
than not the roles themselves will stay
what they are so in adulthood the
scapegoat is still usually treated as
kind of the black sheep of the family
and it might be very covert and hard to
point a finger at but it will be there
the family system likely still operates
around meeting the needs of the golden
child
and blaming everything that goes wrong
on the scapegoated child and the more
life experiences that both of these
children have the more kind of fodder
the family system has right the golden
child may have grown up with many more
opportunities than the scapegoated child
because they were treated very
differently the scapegoated child may
end up getting into a lot of trouble in
their lives because they were not given
proper coping skills as they grew up so
the children who were not scapegoated in
the family might look like they're
living much more functional much more
socially acceptable lives because they
probably are and the scapegoated child
will continue to be seen as the family
problem and again this is usually very
subtle maybe the family plans get
togethers without consulting the
scapegoated child and then claims that
things just kind of came together at the
last minute and it really wasn't their
fault they weren't being intentionally
disclusive but this might happen over
and over again the family members might
provide support to each other in ways
that they do not provide support to the
scapegoated child and then brush it off
as well we're all just pretty similar
but you're not really like us so it
would be weird if we have these
conversations there will be a lot of
subtle disclusion or prejudices against
the scapegoated child which will be
completely and totally denied if they
are brought up so if you are the
scapegoat and you bring up the fact that
you are treated unequally in your family
to your family members it is an absolute
trap because now it gives them the
opportunity to point the finger back at
you and say look at the scapegoat being
crazy again and unfortunately this
gaslighting is unlikely to ever end
because the people doing it are not
aware of the fact that they are
functioning within their own family
roles and that their own perceptions are
not pure right the parent who put the
child in the scapegoated role in the
first place truly believed that they
were doing no wrong and the entire
family has been entrenched in the belief
for decades and decades that you are
crazy and they are sane so it's going to
be really hard to make your case with
your family and for this reason i want
to talk a little bit about how to cope
with the scapegoated role as an adult
and here's where i want to stop and once
again say i am not a licensed counselor
so the advice i give here is not
clinical advice it's recommendations
based on reading that i have done and
tools that i have personally found but
if you recognize yourself in the
scapegoated role you really do need the
help of a mental health professional and
that's actually the first piece of
advice that i'm going to recommend for
people who are dealing with the
long-term outcomes of family
scapegoating abuse is find a mental
health professional who understands
family roles and can help you
contextualize what you went through so
alice miller who was an absolutely
brilliant brilliant psychologist talked
a lot about the therapist serving as an
enlightened witness to the individual's
problems so what that means is someone
who properly understands the context of
what you went through being able to
listen to and reflect back to you the
reality of the situation when you tell
them your perception of it can be
extraordinarily healing
extraordinarily and for many scapegoats
this might be the first time in their
lives that they're able to show up and
present their experiences to someone and
actually get a radically different
perspective on it because again the
scapegoat tends to believe that they are
bad they are flawed something is wrong
with them so they'll even tell the
stories of their own lives to other
people as though that's the case so the
scapegoat might actually be used to
talking to their friends about their
problems and over assuming
responsibility or maybe making jokes
about their experiences but they very
rarely actually see themselves as
victims of abuse so going to a therapist
who can help you contextualize what
happened and understand that you were
not at fault for this parent projecting
their own issues onto you can be healing
on a level that i think most scapegoats
don't understand is possible being in
the presence of someone who understands
this situation with a zoomed out
perspective can completely change the
way that you think about yourself and i
also want to acknowledge that therapy is
not accessible or available to everyone
so there are a lot of books you can read
and i am going to link them in the
description of this video one that i
recommend actually let me grab it i
think i have it i do have it it's called
rejected shamed and blamed and it is by
a woman named rebecca manville who works
specifically with family scapegoats to
help them recover from family
scapegoating abuse and this book gives a
really good overview of a lot of the
different problems that might come up in
relation to being the family scapegoat
how they might show up in adulthood and
what you can do to start working through
those issues and she actually also does
scapegoat coaching so you can get in
touch with her specifically now if you
can't afford coaching or therapy which i
totally recognize a lot of people can't
i think this book is like 10 and i
really recommend that you try to get
your hands on it because it will help
you kind of zoom out and see the
situation that you were in for what it
was the way that a really good therapist
would otherwise help you see the
situation but let's also talk about the
problem of how you're showing up in your
family unit as an adult i can't let you
go without giving you another book
recommendation one second this book
complex ptsd my ring light is getting in
the way of you seeing the title but um
complex ptsd from surviving to thriving
written by pete walker this is one of
the best books i have ever read in my
life period it just gives such an
incredible overview of complex ptsd
which again develops when you have
prolonged interpersonal trauma which can
be psychological abuse from family
scapegoating and this isn't to say that
if you were the scapegoat you definitely
have complex ptsd you don't necessarily
have it but in the scapegoat book they
talk at length about how a lot of
scapegoating victims do develop complex
ptsd and if that's something you
recognize in yourself complex ptsd by
pete walker is an absolute gem of a book
and what i appreciate about both of
these books is that they're very easy
reads like they're very accessible they
don't use all of this jargon these books
are so down to earth and they make
everything really easy to understand and
they give really great hands-on coping
tools now on a practical level let's
talk about what it looks like
interpersonally to live with family
scapegoating abuse so we've already
talked about the kind of cycle of
unstable relationships if you can't
afford professional help or if you can't
afford it i highly recommend
codependents anonymous or
adult children of alcoholics which is a
support group that is not just focused
on adult children of alcoholics it's
focused on adult children of any sort of
family dysfunction so you can go to
coda.org or adultchildren.org to check
out either of those there are 12-step
programs that are geared around healing
interpersonal wounds and adult children
specifically talks about re-parenting it
talks about family roles it talks about
anyone who grew up in a dysfunctional
family and is having trouble coping as
an adult and the groups are all
self-organized and completely free
highly highly recommend checking them
out so step one if you realize that
you're in this role is getting help and
support for yourself step two is looking
at how you can manage the relationships
that you're already in without making
things worse so chances are if you're
the family scapegoat you still have a
difficult or strained relationship with
your family and there are a lot of
different ways to deal with this some
scapegoats go no contact some scapegoats
find ways to minimize contact enough
that they no longer feel like they're
getting triggered constantly by their
family and what you choose to do is up
to you but something that i recommend
being very aware of as a scapegoat is
the fact that your family members in
many cases including your siblings have
been brainwashed by the parent who put
you in the scapegoated role to believe
that you are crazy or unwell and of
course you might have mental health
difficulties right many people do but
that doesn't mean that you are
incorrectly perceiving your role in the
family unit so i would actually caution
scapegoats against trying to confront
their family with this information once
they realize family roles are a thing
and that they were in the scapegoat role
because the most likely thing to happen
is that they are going to get badly
gaslit for this they're going to be told
that they're crazy that these things
never happen to them and that can be
extraordinarily invalidating when you're
already kind of in a raw place so there
kind of has to be an acceptance process
that happens where you go okay i might
never get the validation that i want
from my family that this happened they
might never be able to see it themselves
and learning to be okay with that and to
take care of yourself despite the fact
that the people who put you in this role
might never be able to acknowledge it
can be a giant act of self-care so the
way i always kind of look at it is you
can't hope for external salvation so
it's unreasonable to expect your family
to turn around one day and recognize
this role that you've been in but you
can hope for internal salvation so
others may never stop seeing you in this
role and they may never stop trying to
push you back into the role when you
begin stepping out of it but you can
step out of it you can learn to stop
seeing yourself in this role you can
unlearn the idea that you're bad and
flawed and that there's something wrong
with you you can stop internally
perpetuating your own scapegoated role
that's internal salvation and that's
what you have to focus on first if you
want to start healing from scapegoat
abuse you have to start seeing yourself
differently and being strong enough in
those perceptions to allow them to
override the perceptions of your family
and in time if you're working with a
therapist or counselor or engaged in
your own healing journey around this you
might start to see your family as
wounded individuals as well so you might
be able to recognize that the family
roles that your other siblings were
forced into also weren't that adaptive
or that healthy for them and you might
notice dysfunction or trauma responses
that they're suffering as a virtue of
their role you might notice the unhealed
dysfunction or trauma of your parents
for the first time and you might finally
be able to see that this wasn't a
situation where you were being abused
because you are bad you are being abused
because hurt people hurt people and i
want to be clear that this is a far cry
from saying everything that happened to
me was okay and i'm going to instantly
forgive my family for everything that
happened if anything a lot of
psychologists suggest that moving too
quickly to forgiveness can actually be a
way of trying to bypass the work john
bradshaw is an awesome family therapist
who talks a lot about this he wrote
books like bradshaw on the family which
go over family roles he wrote a book
called healing the shame that binds you
that talks a lot about the process that
we have to move through before we're
able to fully forgive our parents or our
family members for any harm that they
caused us and alice miller also talks
quite a bit about this so there are a
lot of good resources out there to help
you manage the relationships that you
currently have with your family while
you're healing from the scapegoat role
but the thing that i want to emphasize
the most intensely is that you have to
be willing to see yourself differently
before other people do you might become
the absolute best most reformed human
being on earth and your family will
still find ways to scapegoat you a
classic example in the scene i was
talking about earlier the child who was
scapegoated developed an addiction as an
adult became sober their family came to
visit them in rehab and they were
scapegoating the child by telling them
you don't really have an addiction so it
might continue to feel like no matter
what work you do to reform yourself and
become a healthy and well-adjusted
person the family wants to find more and
more ways to shove you back into the
scapegoat role and that's something you
need to expect and develop strategies
around hopefully with the help of a
therapist or coach so that it doesn't
derail you when it happens because there
can be these kind of redemption
fantasies that come up when you're the
scapegoat of i'm gonna get my act
together i'm gonna become a better
person and then my family is going to
see what a good person i am and they're
going to start treating me very
differently but that's not how
dysfunctional family systems work you
were always a good person you just
internalized a bad identity right
so you don't have to get rid of your bad
personness to heal from scapegoating
abuse all you have to do is switch your
perception and realize that all along
you have been a person who is trying
their best and who absolutely does not
just have a bad evil soul and the last
suggestion i want to give around this is
find people you can surround yourself
with who do see that good in you so
there's that old fable where the
grandfather is talking about how he has
two wolves inside of him one who is good
and righteous and wants what's right for
the world and another one who is evil
and wretched and wants to choose things
that are not compassionate and the
grandchild asks him which wolf will win
in the fight and the grandfather says
whichever wolf i feed and it's really
important to note that if the trauma you
are going through is interpersonal in
nature it has to heal interpersonally as
well you can't heal interpersonal trauma
without engaging with other people in
new ways so you have to learn to
surround yourself with people who see
you not as evil and broken and bad the
way your family did but who see you as
good and whole and inherently worthy
because that's how you're going to feed
that wolf inside of you the two wolves
inside of you are the wolves of other
people's perceptions so there's one wolf
who's been told it's whole life you're
bad you're evil something's wrong with
you you make other people's lives hell
and there's another wolf inside of you
born out of the perceptions of people
who love you who see you as good and
caring and compassionate and trying hard
to lead a really honorable life and you
have to surround yourself with as many
people as possible who are going to feed
that wolf because again you can feed
that wolf all day long and you should
but you're also going to need some help
from healthy outsiders because this is
an interpersonal trauma so how much you
choose to contact your family and how
much you choose to put yourself in a
situation where you might be scapegoated
is something that you hopefully with the
help of your counselor are gonna have to
work out but the important thing to
remember is that you need to surround
yourself with people who are feeding the
wolf of the goodness in you because you
need reminders of your own goodness
that's normal that's human everyone
needs that it's just that most people
got it for the majority of their lives
in a way that you did not right so
finding the right help surrounding
yourself with caring and loving friends
and refusing to perpetuate that cycle of
internal scapegoating and refusing to
talk to yourself as though you are bad
and flawed anymore
are all gonna go a long way in starting
to change how you think about yourself
which will extend to how you start
showing up in the world okay i think
that's all i have to say for today about
the family scapegoat role
if you find yourself in this role again
please please seek out professional help
if you can if you can't afford it i
highly recommend you check out
adultchildren.org it's a really great
resource for people who have been
through family dysfunction and or see if
you can get your hands on one of the
books that i've recommended in this
video i will put a list in the
description i hope you know that you are
not alone in this process and you don't
have to be alone in this process anymore
if it feels like you currently are i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and i will see you here
next time where we're going to talk more
about the different family roles
[Music]