hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today we are talking
about something that inside of my own
head I refer to as intellectual
bypassing I don't know if that's a term
anyone else has come up with if so my
apologies and please know that I'm just
using my own definition of this now
intellectual bypassing or using your
cognitive mind to name your emotions in
such a way that you don't have to really
get inside and feel them is a phenomenon
that is not exclusive to avoidant
attachment Styles but it does tend to be
a very very prominent defense mechanism
that those with avoidant leaning
attachment Styles will err on the side
of when they feel threatened in their
attachment system and much like the
sister of intellectual bypassing
spiritual bypassing the people who are
doing this do not know that they're
doing it they think that they are
genuinely processing their emotions
through naming them getting really
familiar with psychology and even
communicating their feelings to other
people without ever really drawing those
feelings into the body and allowing the
self the chance to feel and move through
them so I remember very early on in my
attachment healing Journey reading
somewhere that well those with anxious
strategies tend to be the most embodied
in their emotional states in that they
feel their emotions as very strong
physiologically arousing States those
with avoidant attachment Styles might
actually be a lot more fluent when
they're talking about their feelings
they can kind of comfort themselves by
putting labels on their emotions putting
them in little boxes talking to other
people about them and then going there I
processed my emotions because I named
them and in this video we are going to
talk about how naming your feelings or
naming your past traumas is not the same
as processing feeling into them and
actually moving through them but like
absolutely anything this is of course a
process so let's get into some of the
signs that you might be be
intellectually bypassing your emotional
experience and not allowing yourself the
opportunity to actually heal from those
deeper wounds sign number one is that
you might struggle to feel direct and
embodied anger towards either your
parents or in some cases your partners
because you understand where they are
coming from so it is highly common for
those using avoidant attachment
strategies to have what we call an
exoneration of their early attachment
figures inside of their own minds so to
exonerate someone psychologically means
to absolve someone of fault for some
sort of wrongdoing and when we do this
in relation to our early caregivers what
we are usually doing is going okay I can
unpack my parents history right I can
look at all of my parents traumas all of
the things they went through in their
lives I can understand why they weren't
able to give me what I needed when I was
a child and we can think that doing that
and getting to that place where we
understand and have made peace with our
parents limitations and the things that
they couldn't do for us or give to us
when we were young is the same as
healing from the pain of what happened
whether or not you understand what
happened it still hurts and this is
something that for most people who are
avoidant it is very very hard to accept
this is one I work on every single day
in small and large ways accepting that I
can understand something I can see why
it happened the way it happened I can
understand that the people who inflicted
the pain onto me did not have malicious
intent
and it can still hurt
I can still be wounded as a result of
that even if your caregivers are the
people who are responsible for looking
out for you didn't know better and could
not possibly have done anything
different than what they did when you
are a child you don't know that and when
you are a child you still process the
way that they behave towards you as
rejection as fear as uncertainty and
ambiguity and stress and sadness in
those moments of disconnection
and until you learn to get in touch with
that pain the actual felt experience of
what it was like for you to be a child
in the environment that you grew up in
or maybe the things that you didn't
allow yourself to feel that your system
automatically numbed out for you because
it would have been psychologically
unbearable to face it at the time
until you accept that all of those past
feelings are still stored somewhere in
your body it's going to be hard to
access your full emotional range as an
adult so the first thing that needs to
happen in this process of getting back
in touch with your deeper more authentic
feelings
is accepting on a cognitive level
because that is the first level in which
you need to accept everything if you
Veer avoidant that something bad can
happen without malicious intent you can
understand why it happened the way it
did and it can still really hurt
your feelings your inner child is not
protected by you understanding what
happened they are in pain and that pain
needs to be dealt with addressed and
felt through easier said than done I
know in order to eventually gain a
secure attachment style if that is what
you're after because to be secure means
to feel all of your feelings and accept
them as valid even if you believe you
shouldn't have those feelings or even if
you understand why someone is doing what
they're doing security means being
consciously aware of present with and
accepting of our emotions even in
situations where we don't think anyone
is at fault for causing them sign two
you might be prone to intellectually or
psychologically bypassing your feelings
is that you pride yourself on being very
stoic and calm in the midst of
emotionally intense situations this is
something that is very common to those
with avoidant attachment Styles and it
is something that is a very big
perpetuator of that anxious avoidant
downward spiral that tends to happen
when these two Styles get together
because those with avoidant attachment
Styles have learned instinctually from a
very young age in many cases to stop and
cut off awareness of emotions in high
pressure situations this is now what you
will naturally do as an adult so you
could be getting screamed at by your
boss getting insulted by your partner in
a number of emotionally intense
situations and you might feel the whole
time like you are just kind of a calm
detached Observer
you don't react you don't feel a strong
emotional response you survive those
situations by going this has nothing to
do with me this person is projecting
right now they're getting all enmeshed
and muddled and throwing things at me
that don't have anything to do with me
and because it doesn't have anything to
do with me I don't have to feel anything
about it now why would this be your
response the reason why those with
avoidant attachment systems have this
capacity and this tendency to stay very
stoic in emotionally intense situations
is because avoidant attachment Styles
tend to develop in predictably hostile
caregiving environments so what does
that mean if you have let's say an
intermittently hostile intermittently
warm and accepting caregiving
environment you're going to be likely to
develop an anxious attachment strategy
because some of the time you can get
what you need so you're going to try
harder and harder to elicit that warm
caregiving that you know is available to
you sometimes
with the avoidant attachment style I do
want to make it clear that I'm using the
word hostile Loosely here hostile
doesn't necessarily mean that your
parents were terrible and neglectful and
that they were always mean to you it
could just mean that they themselves had
avoidant attachment systems and didn't
know how to offer the care emotional
intimacy and warmth that a more secure
caregiver is able to offer but because
you grew up in that environment that was
hostile but predictably so
what you learned is that displaying
strong emotions or really showing the
people around you what you were
experiencing wasn't all that helpful for
you it didn't really get you what you
wanted but what did get you what you
wanted was learning to understand your
caregiver's behavior on Tuesdays dad
tends to come home Angry on Thursdays he
doesn't what happens Tuesday that is
different than Thursday does he go to
the bar on Tuesdays does he not go to
the bar on Thursdays when I put my toys
away my parents tend to not get angry
when I don't put my toys away my parents
get very angry almost every time it's
predictable so you internalize all of
these rules all of these if then
statements that allow you to sequence
the patterns of behavior that lead to
keeping you safe and what is not
particularly helpful when you're trying
to create logical sequences inside of
your own mind getting super distracted
by your emotional states so as a child
as the Adaptive child that you were you
learn to pay a lot less attention to
your emotional states and a lot of
attention to what happened when and why
and now as an adult in heightened
emotional states what does your body
automatically do it goes if I can figure
out why this is going on what's
Happening what led to this then I can
make sure that I prevent a similar
situation from happening in the future
and so your body naturally does what it
knows how to do which is push down the
emotional system and get focused on the
logic now the long-term solution for
lack of a better term to this response
is to learn to be present to your
emotional experience while it is
happening in the moment this takes a
long time it's something you have to
train yourself very deliberately and
consciously to do to tune into your body
in high pressure moments and notice what
is going on and invite and allow the
sensations that your body is normally
trying to push down to actually be fully
present in your body and the reason why
this is important is because you are not
Gathering all the information you need
if you are dissociated from your
emotional state in a high pressure
situation
emotional state awareness is actually
very important for understanding how to
make wise interpersonal decisions if you
are not feeling pain anger or sadness
while you are taking in psychological
abuse or something similar you are going
to end up in those situations over and
over and over again because you are not
logging the information that your body
ought to be telling you about this not
being a safe situation I highly
recommend doing any form of somatic
awareness practices that you can in
order to start developing an awareness
of what is happening for you internally
in high pressure moments for myself a
mixture of therapy with a somatically
informed therapist the philosophy of
radical honesty and authentic relating
and just doing a lot of reading have all
helped me to get more in touch with my
body states in the present moment but
again this is a journey it takes time
what you need to note right now is that
your path to Healing will include must
include if if you're trying to get to
security a present moment awareness of
Your Body Sensations in high pressure
situations you cannot make holistic
secure choices about your relationships
and your future if you are unable to
access your emotions in moments of high
stress and I want to note that if you
are in situations quite frequently that
are very high stress and you start
getting in touch with your true
emotional experience you might become
overwhelmed and this might require you
to make some fairly significant changes
in your life in order to make sure that
you are not frequently getting
emotionally overwhelmed and the good
news is that if you're in situations
where you're getting emotionally
overwhelmed by staying present in them
there is a 100 chance that you are
stressing out your system all of the
time by putting yourself in those
situations now in a numbed out State
your inner child is still taking those
blows your body is still registering the
stress or the abuse or whatever it is so
gaming that Awareness on a conscious
level is not going to actually make it
worse it's just going to allow you to
notice how bad it has always been and
that awareness is going to help you make
healthier choices about your life and
relationships if you allow it to sign
number three that you might be
intellectually psychologically bypassing
your emotions is that you believe a
feeling or a trauma or whatever it is
that is coming up for you is processed
once you can name it and logically
explain it now as someone with a Social
Circle that veers very avoidant the
number of times I have heard an avoidant
leaning persons say that they have
processed a trauma or an emotional wound
because they have named it and
acknowledged it is a very high number
all the while those people might be
having frequent panic attacks bouts of
depression extreme anxiety difficulty
forming and maintaining close
relationships and not connecting that
those past traumas that they can name
but have not actually moved through
emotionally might be the cause behind
all of those other problems in order to
process an emotion or process an event
that has happened in the past what it
means is that we have made ourselves
aware of where those past feelings or
unresolved traumas are showing up for us
in a real present day-to-day life and
dealing with those reactions that come
up in the moment in a different way
naming something as traumatic and
placing it in a neat little box in our
minds is not the same as resolving and
moving on from trauma particularly for
those who Veer avoidant so recently I
was doing circling which is a form of
interpersonal meditation and I was
sitting with someone who was feeling
angry in their body language was
reflecting that and I was sitting there
looking at them and going I feel so calm
I actually feel almost comforted that
you're angry because that puts me in
this deactivation response where I can
just kind of cool experience you
experiencing your anger and I feel
totally fine and in control and then I
started tuning into my body
and I noticed kind of waves of energy
almost coming up from my stomach into my
chest and then subsiding and pushing
themselves back down
and I was like oh I think that's my
anger I think that this is actually a
really common response for me is to feel
some sort of intense emotion rising up
and my body just automatically down
regulates it for me just automatically
pushes it away and I went what if I
intentionally tried to bring that
feeling up into the rest of my body
what if I actually allowed myself to
embody this anger in a very full very
present way and it was hard to do that
it does not come naturally if you have
an avoidance system to draw in your
present moment experiences and give them
validity
I can feel angry even if I do not have a
complex psychological explanation for
why I am angry
I can feel sad or depressed and let my
body sink into that and actually deeply
feel it even if I don't think it makes
sense that I'm sad or depressed and this
type of practice done over and over
again that tuning into the body noticing
what's coming up in the moment allowing
it to be present and if you Veer
avoidant you're probably going to have
to consciously Encourage Yourself to
stay present with it that's going to be
the first step towards actually
processing those emotions you don't
process emotions by thinking about the
past you process emotions by recognizing
the moments in which the past is present
for you and feeling those feelings in
the moment
and I want to be clear here that a lot
of people who Veer avoidant I've noticed
tend to have a misconception about what
it means to process our feelings be
because you may have grown up around
people who are highly disregulated and
who don't know how to process emotions
in a kind of clean self-contained way
the only pattern you may know for
processing emotions might be this kind
of very anxious activated explosive
pattern and there is a very big
difference between enmeshed emotional
expression and self-responsible
emotional expression when we are
self-responsible about our emotions we
can feel our anger we can feel our
sadness and we can still be conscious
and intentional about how we will
respond to those things we do not need
to lash out and try to get somebody else
to fix the way that we're feeling we can
learn to pull the feelings into our body
and if this feels overwhelming at first
I recommend doing it with a therapist in
a group therapy situation some sort of
situation where there is a contained
environment for emotional processing and
starting to practice that way this is
what people mean when they say you have
to feel your feelings I used to
absolutely hate that phrase every time I
heard it for like the first two years of
me doing attachment healing work and
sometimes still now I'm like I don't
know what that means like I don't know
what you guys are talking about when you
say all this stuff like you have to feel
it to heal it I'm like if it's not there
it's just not there if you lean avoidant
you have to work intentionally on
pulling those feelings into your body
and being present with them that is what
it means to feel your feelings it takes
conscious work if your body is naturally
a body that down regulates away from
highly intense emotions for you sign
number four that you might be
intellectually or psychologically
bypassing your feelings is that if you
feel something but you can't figure out
what might have caused that feeling or
why you feel it you just assume that
you're wrong about the fact that you're
feeling that so you have made a mistake
you've made an error in your processing
if you feel sad one day but there's no
reason why you might be sad you just go
I must be wrong I must not be sad I'm
just being ridiculous this is so common
so so common particularly around very
activating emotions like anger or very
intense emotions like grief if you air
more avoidant you tend to trust your
theories about your own emotions much
more than you trust the actual
experience of them and this can also
work in the reverse order you might not
feel something in a situation where you
think it would make sense for you to
feel a different thing and then you
might start trying to convince yourself
you do feel the thing that you actually
don't so of course I feel super happy in
this new relationship even though maybe
your body is logging a lot of pressure
and fear of course I feel really sad
about that person passing away or that
tragic event happening when in reality
your system might not be reacting that
strongly why does this happen again
because you learned early on to rely on
sequencing and tune out of your
emotional state in your mind a sad
feeling should follow a sad event in
your mind an angry feeling should only
arise if someone has done something very
clearly and objectively wrong so if you
can't find that external clear reason
why your feeling the way you're feeling
you just kind of Gaslight yourself a bit
and go I'm not really feeling that
something weird must just be going on
with my body state today or whatever it
is and to work with this one we just
have to learn radical acceptance of
whatever we are feeling so if we are
getting more in touch with those body
States if we are getting more in touch
with our emotions you're going to have
to allow yourself the space maybe for
the first time in your life to go even
if I'm feeling something that I can't
make sense of I'm going to accept it as
the truth that I'm feeling this
I've had times in my healing Journey
where I'll wake up one day and feel
completely depressed and be like there
is not a logical reason on this planet
why I should be feeling depressed and
yet
the longer I allow myself to stay
present with that feeling
the more I allow myself to sink into it
and to allow my body state to speak to
me the clearer I tend to get on where
that depression or that anger or that
grief or that excitement actually is
coming from
you have to sit with the question for
long enough for the true answer to
appear
but you can't get there by
intellectualizing about it you have to
let yourself drop into the emotional
state into the body State and notice
what emerges when you're present with it
and sign number five that you might be
intellectually bypassing your emotional
experience is that one of the things you
find really soothing when you're upset
or when something has gone very wrong
for you in life is reading about the
psychology behind what happened and
finding a way to name and categorize all
of your experiences now all attachment
Styles who are interested in Psychology
will do this however for the avoidance
specifically it tends to be a very
strong self-soothing mechanism whereas
for those with anxious attachment
strategies it might actually be very
activating for them to read about
psychology because as they're reading
they're pulling their memories back into
their body and getting activated all
over again about them not saying that's
necessarily a negative experience just
noting the difference here for those
with anxious strategies it might
upregulate them more to read about
psychology and kind of find names and
labels for what they're dealing with for
those with avoidance systems it might
actually work to calm their emotional
states down and down regulate them away
from emotionally intense situations
again because to you safety is
understanding if you can understand
what's happening your body believes that
you are safe so I'm currently taking a
course that hopefully someday will
qualify me to do the coding of adult
attachment interviews so a therapist or
someone would give their client an adult
attachment interview then send it to
someone like me to code it and in the
process of going through this course
there was one day where we were reading
a transcript of an adult attachment
interview and the person being
interviewed was explaining quite a bit
about his emotional experience oh yeah I
felt this I think I had a sense of
resentment towards my parent but in
retrospect I understand that they had
trauma that they were dealing with their
own negative experiences from childhood
that those things were a projection and
so I can't really blame them right
there's a lot of that exonerating
happening and the instructor told us to
watch for what moment tended to flip
that person into that exonerating speech
pattern it was often a moment in the
interview when they became a little bit
emotionally aroused so something
happened that made them feel a little
bit emotionally threatened or a little
bit angry or a little bit distressed and
they would immediately flip into that
hyper cognitive state where they are
naming everything putting everything in
its proper boxes tying it up with a neat
bow and pushing the Box away
right instead of staying present with
that emotion feeling into it and
communicating about it from the inside
and I think the terminology that was
used at one point to explain this was a
lid gets put on the emotional state
right cognition intellect understanding
things on psychological terms for those
who Veer avoidant is a means in many
cases of putting a lid on their
emotional state so they don't have to
feel it anymore the problem is that
contrary to what your conscious mind has
been telling you for most of your life
you cannot avoid pain or vulnerability
by not feeling it by putting a lid on it
it's still in there now it's just harder
to access so in the moments when you
need it because those emotional
experiences are very important for
developing emotional discernment in life
it's a lot harder to access and unpack
and again you didn't consciously choose
to pack those things up that tightly
your body and mind started doing this
for you naturally and instinctually from
a very young age and so the world view
that needs to eventually get reversed
here is this world view of I will always
be safe as long as I can understand and
adapt myself and my emotions too my
environment
well that might be true it is also
forcing you to stuff down a lot of your
emotions and not live in an authentic
embodied way where you get the full
range of things that you actually want
out of your life and where you have
access to the type of feelings that are
very important for forming and
maintaining close connections with other
people you need things like anger to
learn where to set your boundaries you
need things like grief and sadness
to help you form intimate connections
with other people and help you
understand what you don't want to lose
being able to not just understand and
name but fully feel and swim in the
waters of your own emotional experience
in a safe and contained way is what
earning secure attachment for those who
Veer avoidant is all about it's not
about intellectualizing everything being
able to perfectly recount why everything
happened the way it did based on this
story you have about everybody's traumas
and wounds and what led to what though
that certainly does not hurt right
that's not a bad thing to do it's just
that it will not take you all the way
if you want to go the rest of the way
with your attachment healing process you
have to learn to get in touch with those
feelings stop intellectually bypassing
them allow them to exist in your body
allow yourself to stay present and
trusting of them and allow yourself to
use those feeling States as information
about the choices that you need to be
making about your life and attachment
relationships all right that is all I
have to say for today on the topic of
intellectual slash psychological
bypassing within the avoidant attachment
system as always let me know what you
guys are thinking or feeling in the
comment section of this video I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
thank you