hey guys heidi preeb here today i wanted
to talk about something that i was
having a lot of thoughts about recently
because i feel like as i have been going
through kind of an attachment healing
journey and changing quite significantly
the way that i show up in different
relationships especially when it comes
to new friendships i'm forming old
relationships that are close that i'm
kind of renegotiating the boundaries of
i have noticed that there is one trait
in a person that really defines their
ability to have healthy relationships
and that trait is the ability to
tolerate discomfort
so i think that so many of us
particularly those of us who are
insecurely attached whether that means
we are avoidant fearful avoidant or
anxiously attached have a very intense
fear that conflict means the end of a
relationship and our relationship to
conflict itself will be very dependent
upon our attachment styles but all
insecure styles tend to get emotionally
disregulated by conflict and as soon as
our systems are in that kind of
fight-or-flight mode it gets really
difficult to resolve absolutely any
interpersonal situation right as soon as
we feel like i'm being attacked in some
capacity our most overwhelming instinct
is self-protection and this goes for
anyone of any attachment style our
attachment styles just dictate how we're
likely to respond when we feel
threatened but i really think that what
characterizes secure relationships is
not the fact that there's never conflict
it's not that there is never situations
that really need to be sat down and
worked through it's that secure people
know how to keep themselves calm
regulated and present during emotional
discomfort and i've been thinking a lot
lately about what goes into that quality
or trait so how do you become a person
who's comfortable sitting through
emotional discomfort and having
difficult conversations where you're
vulnerable with another person but
you're not expecting them to fix the way
you're feeling where you can admit when
you've been wrong where you can listen
to someone say something that might feel
a little bit threatening for you on an
ego level and not react in a defensive
way what is it that allows us to develop
this quality so i sat down today and
wrote out a list of five things that i
think really help when we're trying to
make ourselves into people who can
tolerate emotional discomfort and i
think that as anyone moves through an
attachment healing journey you are going
to naturally start cultivating these
qualities as you move more towards
secure but for the sake of giving
ourselves a little bit of a
goal-oriented process and just having
some guideposts to measure ourselves
against and figure out how well we're
doing at these things and where more
work might need to be done i wanted to
talk about what those qualities are and
what often gets in the way of us
cultivating them because sometimes there
are significant environmental forces
working against us here it's not just
our own minds in biology so the first
thing that i think we really need to be
able to do to tolerate emotional
discomfort is have a strong and
pervasive sense of ourselves and who we
are so if we go into an interaction
whether it's with a romantic partner or
a friend or a boss or anyone and we are
feeling like the way i feel about myself
is dependent upon this interaction going
well it's going to be really hard for us
to tolerate any discomfort because that
discomfort is going to disregulate us on
an identity level right and when our
identities are being threatened that
feels very very scary to our emotional
system so that's when we kind of go into
fight or flight mode because all of a
sudden we're like oh i have to prove
that i'm a certain way i have to prove
that i'm right i have to prove that i
wasn't doing something bad or else the
way that i think about myself is going
to be fundamentally shifted and that is
very dangerous territory to be in we
have to be secure enough in who we are
and who we know ourselves to be in order
to have difficult conversations in which
we might be misunderstood and still be
able to keep ourselves okay within those
situations and this is a big thing to do
like cultivating a secure sense of self
is a lifelong journey for most of us
right and it's not like you're ever
going to get 100 of the way there but we
should always be striving to improve the
way that we relate to ourselves so in
order to have conversations that are
only about the thing we're talking about
and that do not have all of this deeper
subtext we have to have a secure and
pervasive idea of who we are outside of
relationships right so who we are on our
own who we don't need confirmation from
other people to believe that we are and
if we can go into situations with that
security in ourselves and in our own
characters we won't need to panic if
people are disagreeing with us we can
stay calm because we know who we are and
if someone else isn't seeing that in a
given moment that's okay that's their
stuff right that's not us the way
someone else wants to think about us is
their own business it doesn't really
have that much to do with us right we
are only responsible for how we show up
and so if we have personal integrity it
gets a lot easier to allow for temporary
periods of being misunderstood in
relationships which leads me to trait
number two emotional regulation so
when we are having difficult
uncomfortable conversations with people
if we have strategies for keeping
ourselves physiologically calm through
those conversations it's going to be a
lot easier to truly take in someone
else's point of view because again as
soon as we're in fight or flight mode
we're not thinking about other people we
are just thinking about our own survival
and this is often what leads us to
become incredibly defensive in
conversations to attack other people
because we just feel so wired and it
feels like a conflict is necessary if we
know how to keep ourselves calm keep
ourselves centered and notice things
like when we're triggered and need to
take a break from the conversation we're
going to have a much better chance at
being able to tolerate discomfort right
because the level of discomfort will
rarely if ever become unbearable if we
know how to keep ourselves emotionally
centered and stable we then are able to
both hold space for other people's
vulnerability as well as share ourselves
in a more vulnerable way because we're
not expecting something in return from
it and that ability to emotionally
regulate ourselves in difficult
conversations is truly a lifelong
journey like i have been working very
intensively on this skill for years now
and really it's only at this point in my
life that i'm truly noticing i'm able to
do it well it's very very difficult when
you're insecurely attached to not take
things personally and to be able to stay
centered in yourself when someone else
is dysregulated but being able to do
that is going to be monumental to having
and moving through difficult
conversations with people right if you
just expect yourself to never get
triggered good luck you will get
triggered you will get upset you will
get defensive but if you can catch
yourself doing those things
bring yourself back to a calm centered
place and then respond from your adult
self not your dysregulated child self
it's going to be a lot easier to
navigate conversations that feel
uncomfortable trait 3 is humility if you
go into relationships expecting to never
have your thoughts or ideas threatened
to never be wrong and to never have to
change your thinking or admit to someone
else that you made a mistake you are
probably not going to have any
relationship that lasts longer than
a couple of months at best right or
you're at least not going to have any
deep emotionally penetrative
relationships right because the best
relationships are the relationships that
allow us to lovingly challenge the
things that we know and that allow us to
see the world through someone else's
eyes and to allow a relationship to
change us in that way we have to have
humility we have to have enough respect
for someone else's humanity to go if we
have a difference of opinion it's
possible
likely even that there's something i'm
missing right there's more information
that i could get from this person that i
could be curious about and that i could
approach with an open mind that might
help me understand their point of view
better and in order to approach that
with a truly open mind i have to be
willing to consider the idea that i
might be wrong about something or i
might be misunderstanding something or
that there's some nuance or gray area
between the two opinions that we hold
that are opposite but if we need to
think of ourselves as right at all times
it's gonna be really hard to have long
lasting relationships and a really
important part of this is also being
able to accept that we don't always do
the right thing sometimes we don't have
all the information that we need so we
make our best educated decision and that
educated decision hurts someone else and
if we're not willing to acknowledge that
sometimes we hurt people sometimes we
mess up sometimes we don't get it all
right it's gonna be really hard to form
a healthy relationship with anyone right
and this is something that i see so many
people really struggling with these days
and in large part i think that this is a
product of the way we interact on the
internet like we have cancel culture
where if you make one mistake you are
not shown any empathy or compassion
people aren't encouraging each other to
learn and grow there is this almost joy
that we take in other people being wrong
and if we take that joy in other
people's wrongness it invites other
people to take that same joy when we get
something wrong when we show up with
patience and empathy and a genuine
desire to help people navigate the
difficulties that they're going through
in terms of worldview shifts we open
ourselves up to relationships where
mutual growth is encouraged right but if
we spend all of our time judging other
people and believing that we know best
and our morals are always superior we
are only going to end up in
relationships with other people who
spend their time doing the same and then
the second we're out of line they're
going to be the first people to cancel
us so we need to be approaching our
relationships with humility allowing
people the grace to mess up and grow and
expecting that we also will need that
grace from other people nobody gets it
right 100 of the time nobody not even
close to 100 of the time right and we
have to expect that of ourselves and of
other people if we want to have any sort
of long-term lasting relationship
because expecting perfection from either
ourselves or others is going to set us
up for very quick very drastic
disappointment in any relationship trait
number four is one that i think as a
society we have largely abandoned and
it's a huge problem and that trait is
accountability now the reason i think we
are less accountable to the mistakes
that we make to the ways that we hurt
other people is because we no longer
live in communities the way that we once
did right so if we have the majority of
our interactions happening online if we
have relationships that are very
disconnected from the other
relationships in our lives there isn't
always a strong incentive for us to show
up and be humble and admit when we've
done something wrong because if we feel
shame and we have the option to just
hide ourselves away ghost the person
that we feel uncomfortable around and
never deal with that problem that's
honestly what a lot of people are going
to do right it's kind of human nature
and the reason that we used to not be
able to do this is because we used to
live in more closer knit communities
where people would know if you did
something wrong so you were held
accountable to righting your wrongs to
having difficult conversations with
people to maintain your relationship and
to showing up and learning the skills
you needed to learn to repair
relationships but we no longer have that
same sense of accountability because a
lot of our relationships happen outside
the context of community and i think
that that is a very big problem holding
ourselves accountable to having
uncomfortable conversations and figuring
out where we need to compromise and
negotiate in order to get both people's
needs met is the glue that holds
relationships together and sometimes we
need the opinions of other people to
hold us accountable to doing that work
right so i think there's a lot that can
be said for the value of having
community and the value of fostering
community because sometimes it is that
sense of belonging that we want to
maintain that pushes us to confront our
shame deal with it internally so that we
can have the difficult conversations we
need to have where we maybe admit that
we're wrong where we apologize to people
where we take the time to see someone
else's point of view that end up
developing those long-term relationships
so i think that as much as possible it's
actually a really good thing to be
putting ourselves in situations where we
will be held accountable by the people
who love us to do the right thing and to
show up in a compassionate way when it
comes to the relationships that matter
to us and the last trait that i think
goes into this ability to tolerate
emotional discomfort is just having a
healthy sense of self-esteem and this is
very related to trait number one which
is having that pervasive sense of self
but if you are a shame bound person
which is a trait that a lot of
psychologists use to describe someone
who essentially at their core thinks
that there is something deeply wrong
with them that they are a mistake and if
you are insecurely attached it's highly
likely that you are a shame-bound person
so when we believe that about ourselves
even if we have a strong ego we do not
have a strong sense of self-esteem a
strong sense of self-esteem is when you
can look at yourself and go i'm a good
well-meaning person but i make mistakes
i don't always get it right and i don't
need to get it right 100 of the time in
order to feel good about myself i just
have to be committed to showing up in a
continuously better way once i know
better i do better right
people who have a strong sense of
self-esteem don't have a strong sense of
self-esteem because they believe that
they never do anything wrong that's what
it means to have a strong sense of
narcissism self-esteem is a stable
quality that allows you to practice
humility to share yourself vulnerably to
open yourself up to the possibility that
you were wrong or that you hurt someone
and to know that at the end of the day
that does not make you a bad person it
just makes you human and humans make
mistakes and if those five qualities are
ones that you can deeply embody or that
at the least you can work towards
cultivating in yourself you're going to
find that your ability to tolerate
emotional discomfort is going to
skyrocket and your ability to tolerate
emotional discomfort is going to be
massively helpful when it comes to
maintaining long-term healthy
relationships of any form so as always
i'm super curious about where you guys
are at in the process of all of this so
let me know in the comments which of
these traits really spoke to you which
ones you're working on or what else you
think has been helpful for you in
cultivating that strong sense of
self-esteem and that ability to tolerate
emotional discomfort within your
relationships alright until next time i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and as always i will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]
you