hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel I
want to talk about a term that I came
across fairly early on in my attachment
healing work that really appealed to me
but that I never found a proper
definition for that I could really sink
my teeth into and that term is emotional
sobriety so I believe that the first
person who came up with this term was
Bill W who is the founder of Alcoholics
Anonymous and he referred to this term
as having a proper balance between
yourself your fellows and your higher
power and in this video I'm going to
talk more later on about what I think he
meant by that as well as how you can use
this term even if you kind of
instinctually hate the term higher power
I'm not going to ask you to find God
here but this is one of those terms that
I read and kind of instinctually felt
like there was something there inside of
it for me it was kind of like yeah I
don't know exactly what emotional
sobriety is or what it means to me yet
but I know that it's something I want so
this video is essentially just me making
a video for myself 3 years ago with a
little bit more clarity about what that
term now means to me as well as how to
practice it so how do you take this idea
of staying emotionally sober and
actually bring it into your life in a
consistent and actionable way so like
most terms with psychology I like to
look at what the term they were modeled
on literally means so when we talk about
sobriety from something like drug drugs
or alcohol usually what we are referring
to is being in an unaltered State of
Consciousness so if I have not consumed
any agents that are impacting my ability
to perceive the world around me clearly
we call me sober and the same is true
mentally and emotionally because just
like we can get addicted to certain
substances we can also get addicted to
certain patterns of thought or emotion
that distort our ability to see reality
clearly so that can look like things
like liance and fantasy addiction where
we're kind of blurring the line between
fantasy and reality and assigning highly
positive traits to other people that
might not be mirrored in their true
personality it can be things like
compulsively needing to think of
ourselves as self-reliant and assigning
ourselves characteristics of
invulnerability that we stick to even in
times where being open and vulnerable
and accepting help from other people
might be the wiser option it can look
like patterns of rumination obsessive
thought or physiological responses that
come online that are out of our
conscious control so things like the
fight flight freeze or Fawn response
might arise for us in moments where
we're not encountering a true threat but
our body thinks we are and so it very
quickly starts distorting our physiology
to respond to a threat that isn't truly
present so this I kind of liken to the
experience of getting addicted to a
substance either mentally or physically
so you can get mentally addicted to
let's say alcohol you can just start to
compulsively think about it all the time
and feel panicked when you don't have it
but you can also become physically
addicted to alcohol your body chemistry
can start to change once you start
drinking regularly for long enough to
the point where with drawing from
alcohol can actually cause physical
issues and the same is kind of true when
it comes to our emotional system so we
can get consciously addicted to certain
thought patterns but we can also get
physiologically addicted to them so once
again those are those patterns of fight
flight freeze or Fawn that come online
in situations where they might not be
strictly the best possible responses but
our body has learned to generate them
for us without us consciously wanting
that to happen and the reason why I want
to make that distinction is because the
more we talk about emotional sobriety
both in this video and out in the real
world it can feel really easy to just
kind of assume it's a moral failing when
you are not being emotionally sober when
in reality these can be deeply ingrained
patterns and so we're not going to be
able to break them all at once the best
we can do and we're going to get into
this when we start talking about how to
practice emotional sobriety is become
highly aware of when and why we flip
into nons sober States sometimes it is a
conscious choice or a semi-conscious
choice to slip into these states with
something like a romantic fantasy I can
decide to put myself into but something
like a nervous system response I cannot
as easily decide to just not have so in
this video we're going to talk about how
to start inching our way closer to a
state of more frequent emotional
sobriety there's actually a term that I
really like from dialectical behavioral
therapy which is wise mind when you're
in Wise mind you're able to integrate
both your emotions which you're aware of
and in touch with with logic and reason
about a given situation so you're able
to hold those two things at once value
them both as important and make choices
accordingly and all of us have have this
state available to us when we feel well
regulated which is synonymous with when
we feel physically and emotionally safe
so the process of achieving emotional
sobriety means the process of developing
more and more moments in which we can
access that wise self that self that
feels safe enough to access all of the
emotions that are genuinely present in
our bodies as well as competent enough
to understand and make sense of them in
a way that helps us make wise inter
integrated decisions so something else
that I found very comforting to think
about early on in my attachment healing
Journey was that secure attachment is
not like this level of a video game that
you unlock right it's not a permanent
state of Enlightenment where you
constantly feel good and balanced and
emotionally sober it is an average so if
on average most of the time you are in a
state of emotional sobriety and you're
making decisions from that wise well
balanced place then you are centered in
Secure attachment and the the way that
you get to that place of centeredness is
through a series of moments where you
choose the emotionally sober response in
so far as you are able to so you do not
have to do it perfectly you do not have
to get it right 100% of the time but
every time you choose an emotionally
sober response you're slowly working
your way there the same goes for every
moment when you realize I'm not
emotionally sober and you choose to
acknowledge that and leave the major
decisionmaking to your wise regulated
self who you know is going to come back
online at a later Point once You' found
a way to make yourself feel both
physically and emotionally safe so now
that we've got the defining out of the
way I want to move into how to practice
emotional sobriety so I've broken it
down into what I believe is a very sober
series of steps so this is not once
again about achieving Perfection it's
about making small progress from
wherever you are starting from step one
in this process is very simply learning
to tell the difference between when you
are emotionally disregulated and when
you are emotionally sober now for some
of us this is going to look more obvious
than it is for others often Those Who
air a little bit more anxious on the
attachment Spectrum are going to be
quick to recognize when they're very
activated and the reason for that is
because it tends to be a very
high-intensity feeling on the flip side
Those Who air more avoidant tend to
deactivate in moments of high stress so
what that looks like is more of an
emotional numbness so it might actually
be experienced as a lack of emotional
distress or a lack of any sort of
feelings of attachment to a situation
even if logically you know that normally
you feel quite attached to that
situation but I want to be clear it
doesn't matter where you're starting
from this can be a tricky thing to
pinpoint because part of being
emotionally intoxicated is your mind
trying to convince you that you are in
fact in your right frame of mind and you
ought to act on it so there is one thing
I have found that consistently helps me
pinpoint in retrospect when I was and
was not in a state of emotional sobriety
and that is Regret so when I walk away
from a situation and 2 days later or 6
months later experience a high degree of
regret over how I handled it that tends
to be an indication to me that I may not
have handled it from an emotionally
sober place now regret is not always a
perfect indicator because sometimes my
feelings of regret are coming out of a
present moment Fawn response let's say
so it's an imperfect system and you have
to try to get as honest as humanly
possible with yourself in mapping your
own sobriety levels but all you're doing
at stage one of this process is
developing as much of an awareness as
humanly possible of what it feels like
to be in a secure wise integrated calm
state where you feel as though your
emotions are manageable and you're able
to make sense of your experiences versus
a state where you feel either heightened
emotion or significant present moment
lack of emotion another key indicator
might be how much you are in story so
are you noticing yourself telling
yourself a whole bunch of stories about
right and wrong and what other people
should or shouldn't do and making a
bunch of comparisons and judgments and
noticing your body kind of further
respond to those comparison and
judgments and stories about what should
and shouldn't be happening or are you
able to just kind of experience your
emotions very directly so how clear does
your own emotional experience feel to
you for myself being in story is almost
always an indication that I'm not
emotionally sober when I'm emotionally
sober I'm able to look at most
situations and go I feel angry or I feel
hurt or I feel hopeful whatever it is I
usually have a very clear and direct
first person experience of what I am
feeling when I am not emotionally sober
I have a whole bunch of stories and
justifications and rants I want to go on
or I might feel holier than thou or I
might feel significantly lesser than
another person right when we are
emotionally sober for the most part we
can hold a sense of respect for
ourselves and respect for other people
and if it feels really difficult to do
either one of those things that's okay
it's just likely an indication that you
are not in a state of emotional sobriety
where you are seeing things calmly and
clearly in a state of sobriety you can
dislike things about yourself or the
other person but it doesn't feel like
this huge deal right if you don't like
someone you just don't spend time around
them them in an emotionally activated
state it might feel like we desperately
need to change people to get something
out of them or to preserve our own Pride
or prove to ourselves that we're okay so
once again step one is just about
noticing your patterning what is it like
for you to be emotionally sober and to
be perceiving reality accurately and to
be understanding your own emotional
responses versus what does it feel like
to be emotionally intoxicated and to be
either really caught up in or really
detached from your emotional experience
and then we move on to step two which is
starting to notice and name our triggers
so what tends to flip us into an
emotionally intoxicated State fairly
consistently so very easy example for a
lot of those of us who a insecurely
attached is that being around our
families might very quickly trigger us
into a state of emotional intoxication
we might go home to visit our families
and find ourselves feeling either
instantly more combative and snappy and
annoyed or more shut down and dis
Associated and deactivated or an entire
range of things in between so for most
of us there are certain people who tend
to trigger an emotionally nons sober
response in us there can also be certain
situations certain environments let's
say certain types of social situations
certain workplace environments whatever
it is the goal here is just to take what
you learned in step one and start
mapping it out so that you can learn to
start predicting which situations you
are likely to not be emotionally sober
in once again you can cannot just decide
one time to be emotionally sober and
then do it forever these are deeply
ingrained responses so to get to the
point where we are usually sober we
first have to account for the fact that
we are going to have to spend a long
period of time just learning how to
navigate nons sobriety with minimal side
effects so what we're doing here is
figuring out which situations or which
people or which feeling States inside of
us trigger the belief inside of us that
we are not capable of dealing with the
emotions that come up around that thing
so I have another video called emotional
self-containment what it is and how to
practice it or something like that that
I will link in the description of this
video that talks about how to deal with
those triggers when they come up in our
system and in my opinion that's a really
important part of developing emotional
sobriety but for now all we're doing is
figuring out what those trigger points
are and if you're still struggling and
you don't really know what those
triggers are just try to make some
guesses sit down and write out a list of
five types of situations that might be
likely to emotionally trigger you or
that might or that have in the past
flipped you quickly into a fight flight
freeze or Fawn response or that have
really activated or really deactivated
your attachment system just start with
writing down five situations that might
trigger you into a lack of emotional
sobriety and then continue to add to
that list as you go now the reason why
we are doing this is because it becomes
necessary for step number three three
step number three is developing an
action plan for how you will behave when
you are not emotionally sober so in step
one we learn how to differentiate an
emotionally sober state from an
emotionally intoxicated one in step two
we learn which situations tend to bring
out those responses in us now if you are
able to notice you're not emotionally
sober when you are not emotionally sober
kudos to you that's a very high level
skill and most people including secure
people really struggle to do that so the
purpose of step three is to decide for
yourself when you are in Wise regulated
mind what is important to you which
things you definitely do not want to do
when you are not emotionally sober and
how you can start developing some rules
or boundaries or guidelines for your own
behavior that you will follow all of the
time so that you do not start making
important decisions from a place of
being emotionally hijacked so I kind of
liken this to when I was in university I
would get drunk a lot that was one of my
early coping mechanisms and when I would
get drunk my favorite thing to do was to
call everybody I knew and try to
convince them to come out to the bar and
I did not care if they answered the
phone and told me they were in bed and
wanted me to stop calling I would call
four more times I had no shame and often
the next morning I would have shame and
I would go ooh I really wish that I had
not harassed everybody to come out last
night so I eventually made a rule for
myself where I went after I have had
four drinks that was the line at which I
recognized it was highly likely that my
judgment was going to become impaired I
am not allowed to use my phone unless
it's to call a cab so it doesn't matter
how good of an idea it feels to me in
the moment if I've had four drinks or
more within a relatively short period of
time I'm not allowed to call anybody and
invite them out even if once again in
that moment it feels like a phenomenal
idea and then when I was drunk I would
have to adhere to my sober reasoning
because I knew in my mind if this is
that important to sober me there must be
a really good reason why I don't want to
do this even if right now it feels like
I do she made such a big deal about
sticking to this bottom line and this is
exactly the way we need to be treating
our emotional intoxication if I know
that around a certain person I'm going
to naturally want to Fawn and say yes to
anything they ask of me maybe I have a
bottom line rule for myself that if I'm
around this person there is a high
chance I'm in an emotionally intoxicated
state so if they ask me to do anything
I'm not going to give them an answer
until I've had 24 hours to myself to
think about that thing and then I will
get back to them that's a very simple
bottomline rule I can follow when I'm in
an emotionally intoxicated state if they
ask me for something I need to tell them
that I need time to think about it and
then take some time to myself even if in
the moment I feel 100% sure that this
time I'm actually emotion sober and
actually it's totally okay for me to
agree to this thing doesn't matter
bottom line rule right does not matter
even if you're sure you're right if you
make a deal with yourself in a sober
State you stick to it even if you're
pretty sure you're not emotionally
intoxicated this is how we practice
self- protection so another example of
this is that when I was working on this
skill early on in my own attachment
healing process I had this one person
who I knew tended to trigger my fight
response I would get really defensive
around them and I would always want to
tell them about how they were wrong and
I was right so I made a rule with myself
total bottom line non-negotiable rule
with this person I cannot ever use
externalizing language so I cannot say
things like you are toxic you are rude
you are the problem I have to I have to
speak to them using eye language all of
the time I feel hurt I feel
uncomfortable in this interaction I felt
angry when you said this to me it did
not matter how sure I was that I was
right and they were in the wrong I could
not tell them so and this was not to
protect them it was to protect me
because sober me knew that that type of
language would only escalate the
situation an emotionally intoxicated me
was not capable of dealing with an
emotionally escalated environment in a
wise and self-protective way so step
three is all about developing rules that
you can follow when you are not
emotionally sober and sticking to them
no matter what even against your better
judgment in the moment again these rules
are about protecting what you know you
want for yourself when you're in a wise
well-regulated and emotionally sober
State and it's important that these
rules are incredibly simple because when
we are emotionally intoxicated we're
kind of working from like a 4-year-old's
perspective and a 4-year-old cannot
handle complex instructions the max
instructions they can handle are like if
this not that or if this yes that right
so if in the presence of this person
don't immediately agree to anything if
in the presence of this person don't use
externalizing language right it has to
be super super simple and super black
and white because again your emotional
four-year-old self is not capable of
understanding and following rules that
are more complex than that what's much
more likely to happen is that they will
give up and just go with the trigger if
the rule is not incredibly simple to
implement and follow and this leads us
to step number four which is overall
work on beginning to tolerate the
difficult emotions that tend to be the
things that trigger you into an
emotionally intoxicated state so if you
tend to kind of freeze and go quickly
offline anytime you feel a sense of
shame it might be helpful to learn how
to sit with and integrate shame so that
it doesn't flip you into an emotionally
intoxicated response pattern same goes
for feelings of anger if feeling like
someone is disrespecting you flips you
very quickly into a fight response where
you're super physiologically aroused and
really unable to think clearly you might
want to do some work on learning to
express yourself assertively so that
your only options when you feel
defensive are not blow up or self-
abandoned and I find that generally
those of us who grew up insecurely
attached tend to have a need to do some
work around our relationship to
uncertainty and vulnerability if you
grow up securely attached a big part of
what you learn is that life is in
constant motion and that everything is
always changing and that to be alive
means to feel fairly vulnerable and
exposed and to have to grieve things
that you've lost on a regular basis but
attachment relationship are there to
help us soothe and get through those
challenges versus if you grow up with an
avoidant leaning attachment style you're
more likely to tell yourself the story
that you can make the world predictable
by just making sure unconsciously of
course that you never experience your
own vulnerability which does not mean
you're invulnerable it just means you
develop patterns of thinking and feeling
that distort your experience of that
vulnerability so you believe that it
isn't there but this can often give way
to highly neurotic thought patterns
because if you're neglecting your true
emotional experience a lot of things
stop making sense and if you grow up
more anxiously attached you might have
this belief that yes the world is scary
and unpredictable and you are vulnerable
but you can find a certain person a
savior of some sort who can come along
and perfectly take away your pain if you
can just crack the code of someone else
and get them to attend constantly to you
you won't have to stay present with any
of that existential vulnerability so a
big part of step four for anyone who
grew up insecurely attached is to do
some work on your relationship to that
which you cannot control how much are
you able to relax in a world where
everything is in constant motion and
where nothing is guaranteed does that
thought terrify you because you know
that you don't have close enough
connections to be able to soo the pain
of things going wrong or are you able to
accept it and to lean into your close
relationship for comaraderie around that
pain but not to get rescued from it
right so to be securely attached means
that both you and the people you love
are aware of the fact that life is
inherently chaotic and vulnerable but at
least you're not lonely in it you're not
savoring each other from your pain but
there's a sense of solidarity a sense of
We're All in This Together and when one
of us is struggling we're able to be
present with each other as we each find
our own way towards the solution to our
problems but again the vulnerability and
uncertainty that is inherent to being
alive never properly goes away and to be
emotionally sober is to know that and to
have strategies for coping with it
without needing to deny it and again
this is an incredibly long process I
will link some videos of mine in the
description of this video that I think
might help along the way when it comes
to learning to tolerate and be present
with the emotions that generally flip us
into an emotionally intoxicated response
but remember this doesn't happen
overnight it happens over a long period
where we build those time tiny moments
of secure processing up very very slowly
and the fifth and final step in this
process for today is try to keep your
expectations of emotional sobriety
realistic and develop a life filled with
habits that support it so when it comes
to alcohol abuse you don't want to try
to get sober in a bar filled with other
alcoholics right and the same is true of
emotional sobriety if you grew up making
significant thinking or feeling
distortions over the course of your life
there's a very high chance that a lot of
the people you have dated chosen to
surround yourself with chosen to work
with etc etc are also not particularly
secure and are also involved in a lot of
distorted thinking so you might have a
lot of people you can go to who will
serve as kind of yes men for you and go
absolutely you're 100% right and the
other person is 100% wrong or your
partner is always overreacting and being
unreasonable and the problem is never
the way that you're approaching things
which might feel really validating in
the moment but this type of unbalanced
processing is unlikely to help us stay
emotionally sober in order to make sure
that we are keeping ourselves as sober
as we're able to we need to be
conscientious about surrounding
ourselves with other people and
environments who are committed to doing
the same if you can't think of a single
person in your life who's able to
provide you with that kind of mature and
honest and direct feedback I recommend
looking for either a support group or a
counselor who is able to provide you
with that for myself unquestionably
having a therap therapist who operated
from a place of emotional sobriety
themselves and getting to speak with
that person and bring my problems to
them and see what it looked like for a
well-regulated balanced person to
respond to those issues and ask me
questions about them that did not feed
into my neurotic thought patterns went a
really long way towards me even
beginning to understand what emotional
sobriety looked like and from that point
I was able to bring more of it into my
personal relationships and the
relationships that were able to absorb
and evolve into more emotionally sober
Mutual connections went through
incredible growth spurts and some other
relationships fell by the wayside but
the beautiful part is that it becomes
easier and easier the longer down this
road you walk to connect with other
people who are intentionally seeking out
and choosing emotional sobriety in their
own lives and the last thing I want to
point out here is that peace around
having realistic expectations when you
have an addiction to anything whether it
is a substance whether it is a thought
pattern whatever is normally we
developed that addiction because it was
a response to very real pain that we
found intolerable and I think it can be
really common for people to think that
sobriety either literally or emotionally
or both is going to be the solution to
them feeling bad all the time when in
reality it's going to give you a more
direct unaltered experience of your own
pain right so you're not going to
suddenly feel better the more
emotionally sober you are what you are
going to feel is your true feelings
whatever those are are I don't think I
actually knew what grief and sadness and
raw pain felt like until I got
emotionally sober I don't think I knew
what the pain of rejection and
abandonment and loss felt like in
relationships before I got emotionally
sober I only knew how to write other
people off and tell myself that the
losses didn't matter to me emotional
sobriety will force you to confront the
really difficult feelings that you
develop distorted thinking and feeling
patterns in order to avoid because at a
very young age you may not have been
mature enough or capable enough of
coping with those kind of big
existential pains and insecurities and
vulnerabilities but now as an adult if
you choose to you can train yourself to
deal with those things directly instead
of spending your life playing kind of
whack-a-mole with all of the symptoms
that's all emotional sobriety is it's
not an escape from any sort of pain it's
the choice to finally deal with and work
through the pain so that you can come
out the other side of it rather than
than spending your entire life
preoccupied with avoiding it all right
that's all I have to say for today on
the topic of emotional sobriety let me
know as always what's coming up for you
guys as you go through this video and as
always I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and your inner children and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]