hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel lately
we've been talking about the concept of
intimacy so what intimate connections
are what it means to be intimate with
another human being and today we're
going to talk about what I believe is
the biggest block for most people when
it comes to forming those truly deep
intimate connections with other people
which is that we lack self-intimacy
so what is self-intimacy the definition
of this is actually pretty simple I
Define it the exact same way that I
Define interpersonal intimacy just turn
towards the self so in the video that I
released last week where we talked about
intimacy with other people I defined
intimacy as the act of being present
with another person in their undefended
state and today we're going to talk
about self-intimacy as the act of being
present with yourself in your own
undefended State many of us from the
time we were very young far before we
had a choice in the matter learn to
distort our own emotional and
intellectual experiences to give
ourselves a view of ourselves that was
adaptive for us at a certain point in
time but that doesn't really reflect the
entirety of what we think and feel and
so this video is going to be about how
to get to the core and learn to be
present with yourself in those places
where you have historically hidden
yourself from knowing yourself because
from a young age there may have been
parts of your personality or your
natural inclinations that were
threatening to your ability to connect
with other people and this is a topic
that many of the greats in the
psychology space have tackled time and
time again as this field goes on the
ways in which we abandon or disconnect
from ourselves in order to stay in
connection with other people and the
Bold thesis of this video is that the
way to stay in the most deep and
pervasive connection possible with
another person is to First learn to stay
in that type of connection with yourself
and then invite other people into that
while allowing the same type of presence
and acceptance for what they bring to
you so in the last video I used the
authentic relating model of the three
levels of conversation to go over some
of the ways that we might think about
building intimacy that don't really get
us all the way there so as a quick recap
that model suggests that the three
levels of conversation are the
informational level where we're talking
about facts and things that are
happening that are kind of objective and
then the personal level where we're
talking about what we feel and think
about those objective facts and then
there's the relational level and in my
last video I made the argument that this
is where we really Foster true intimacy
with another person which is sharing
with them what our experience in the
present moment is like as well as
receiving with true deep undefended
curiosity what it is like to be them in
the present moment which is often a lot
easier than it sounds because our
natural inclination is to distort even
our own experience of the present moment
so that we Don don't kind of bump into
any sharp edges in our inner experience
and today we're going to talk about how
this same model can apply to our
self-relationship so there are the
things that we know to be kind of
objective facts about ourselves right
this is how we know ourselves on the
informational level I am X years old I
have family members who have these names
I live in this city I work this job I
have these Hobbies or these communities
that I'm a part of right these are all
facts things that we know about
ourselves to be true that anyone could
observe us living and clearly see are
true and then there is the personal
level and this is the level that I
believe most of us are most comfortable
knowing ourselves on this is a level
where I would argue that our ego stories
live and I want to be clear when I use
that phrase that when I say ego stories
I don't necessarily mean that as a
negative thing ego stories is just the
term I'm going to use in this video to
define the ways in which we think about
ourselves that could be things like a
sense of superiority over other people
but it could just be things like I am a
good friend I am an intelligent curious
person I have this type of Personality
or I enjoy this type of work or these
types of events or these types of people
right we all have these kind of broad
brush Strokes that we use to define
ourselves because it is an absolute need
to have some sort of consistent
narrative about who we are everyone has
this it's a good thing to have without
it we would be kind of lost in adrift
and it would be a lot harder to make
decisions day to day as well as overall
however where true intimacy with
ourselves gets formed is when we drop it
down One More Level because the
authentic relating model is an
interpersonal model I'm going to change
this one a bit and I would say when
we're looking at the self-relationship I
would change the word relational to the
word experiential so the deepest way
that I can possibly know myself is to be
present with myself on a
moment-to-moment basis and develop a
consistent awareness of what it is like
to be me in every moment so if I'm
feeling something in a moment that I
don't understand can I stay present with
that
can I stay present with it even if the
feeling is threatening to the idea that
I have about myself on a personal level
can I stay with that feeling can I stay
with that authentic experience of the
moment even if it's threatening to me on
an interpersonal level what if I'm
feeling angry in a situation where I
believe a nice person like me wouldn't
be angry about this or wouldn't feel
upset about this can I stay with the
feeling of sadness and disappointment
when the story I have about something is
I'm really excited about this thing and
it's gonna go well
how present am I able to stay with
myself in the moments where my direct
felt experience conflicts with the story
that I have about myself on a personal
level or the story that I have about
something outside of me this is so much
easier said than done because normally
when our felt experience conflicts with
the story that we have about something
most of us are prone to automatically
without even taking the time to think
about it distorting either our
experience so telling ourselves I must
not really be feeling this I must just
be wrong about what I'm feeling or
experiencing or trying to change the
external experience so that our internal
experience will change as well and in
the process losing sight of a lot of
valuable information that we can only
really understand through accepting and
staying present with both the situation
we're in exactly as it is
and our felt experience of that
situation exactly as it is so when it
comes to understanding and really
knowing ourselves I like to think of it
as a science experiment so I had this
professor when I was doing my master of
science degree who used to say once you
have a really good hypothesis one that
you can really sink your teeth into your
main goal should become finding evidence
to prove your hypothesis wrong right
this is how we stay honest in adhering
to the scientific method we don't just
look for evidence that confirms our
points of view we look for evidence that
disconfirms it and the interesting thing
that I started learning was that the
process of looking for counter evidence
in any area of life doesn't only serve
to prove or disprove a certain
hypothesis often where it's most useful
is it adds incredible depth and Nuance
to the hypotheses that we form so maybe
your overall hypothesis is correct
however you learn a whole bunch about in
which contexts it is correct or
incorrect and the same is true when we
apply that same sort of scrutiny to the
way that we experience ourselves I am a
kind person might be true in 95 of
context and it might be untrue in five
percent and those five percent of
contacts might actually be the times
where it's more important to be firm
than it is to be kind to be
self-protective than it is to be kind to
be assertive than it is to be kind
however if I'm trying to make one broad
stroke cover every area of my life I'm
going to miss a lot of nuance in the
process about in which context I show up
in which ways so the process of
developing really deep embodied
self-intimacy is the process of learning
to be present enough with our
moment-to-moment experience of ourselves
to find counter evidence for these
hypotheses we have about ourselves or
about other people and the way we exist
in relation to them and be willing to
both challenge our hypotheses because
the way that we're showing up or the way
that we're existing in the world is
highly likely to change over time
as well as find Nuance within those
hypotheses maybe I'm an intelligent and
curious person and there are areas where
I feel very closed off where I don't
want to learn more where I actively
resist taking in new information and in
those cases what's going on what can I
learn about my resistance in that
situation and maybe what it's protecting
me from
the more we're able to get curious about
what's happening for us moment to moment
and incorporate New pieces of nuanced
information about ourselves the better
we get to know ourselves and the more
we're able to be really precise about
where things do and don't apply so in a
nutshell what the process of building
self-intimacy is is the process of
lessening our resistance to our own
inner experience and this requires us to
do a deep dive into how it is that we
usually do that how is it possible that
we tend to avoid these unpleasant
uncomfortable emotions that we don't
want to feel so I think of this as the
process of finding your own hiding
places the places where over the course
of your life you have hidden your
authentic experience from yourself
somewhere inside of yourself there is a
line in the song Happiness by Taylor
Swift where she's talking about a
relationship and she goes I showed you
all my hiding spots and I remember
listening to that and like getting chill
bills thinking about what a beautiful
metaphor that is for intimacy
and in this case in this process we're
going to be learning to show ourselves
all of our own hiding spots where do we
usually go when we have an emotion or an
experience that we don't want to show
the rest of the world and that we don't
even want to show ourselves where do we
hide that inside of ourselves and the
first thing we want to get really
comfortable with doing is just noticing
the moments in which we feel desperate
to change State as well as what we're
inclined to do in order to change our
state so what do I mean by that I mean
let's say you're having a moment where
you are feeling a very strong very
overwhelming feeling that you do not
want to feel what is your tendency to do
to get rid of that feeling some of us
try to dissociate from it we might reach
to overeating or drinking or doing some
sort of compulsive behavior that we know
is going to change the way we're
experiencing our own physiology right
this thing is happening I don't want to
feel the way I feel about it happening
so I'm going to try to change the way I
feel so that I can tolerate it and fit
myself inside of it other people might
immediately move to try to change the
external situation so that they don't
have to encounter the uncomfortable
feeling that the current situation
brings up in them so let's say my
partner isn't texting me back quickly
enough so I'm going to lash out and
insult their character and try to get
them to change their behavior so that I
don't have to be present with that
feeling of sadness and rejection and the
goal here is just to be present and
notice when we are wanting to do this
when we are badly wanting to change the
experience we are having and pay
particular attention to when you're
experiencing a feeling that is recurring
you might notice the more that you're
staying on the page with yourself and
staying present with yourself that there
are patterns of certain emotions that
you instantly want to disconnect from
maybe it's anger maybe it's grief maybe
it's abandonment maybe it's rejection
maybe it's embarrassment and humiliation
this is the process of finding your own
hiding places when you feel these things
that you systematically do not want to
feel do not want to experience do not
want to look at where do you go to avoid
them do you turn to a substance do you
turn to manipulation where do you go to
hide those feelings inside of but I want
to be clear here we're not playing a
game of hide and seek this isn't about
finding your coping mechanism pointing
at it going you're bad come out of
hiding this is a game of sardines so
when I was a kid at sardines was my
favorite game it's essentially exactly
like hide and seek but when someone
finds you they hide with you and then
the next person comes and when they find
the two of you they hide with you as
well and this happens until everybody
has found the original person who went
to hide and they're all sitting in the
hiding place together and I thought of
this game the other day and was like
that is a beautiful metaphor for
intimacy someone is hiding they're
trying to Shield themselves from the
world in some way and someone comes and
finds them and sits with them and gets
to know their hiding place and gets
familiar with it instead of judging it
or trying to bring them out of it and so
this is the process of finding the parts
of yourself that you normally hide and
instead of trying to change those parts
or yell at them or tell them they're
wrong just sitting inside of that Hiding
Place with them and going why are you
here in very tangible terms if I'm angry
and I notice a pattern of overeating or
drinking or shutting down and hiding
from the world when I'm angry instead of
yelling at myself and telling myself to
stop all those things what if I sat down
with the part of myself well doing that
activity that was choosing to do it and
just asked it some questions
hey what would you be feeling right now
if you weren't feeling this relief
because you just picked up a chocolate
bar or a beer what would you be doing
right now what would you be feeling if
you were continuing to engage with this
situation instead of withdrawing and
sitting in your room
and there's nothing wrong with the fact
that this is what you're doing I'm just
curious what is it that you're avoiding
and can I hear a little bit more about
that
and then the next time it happens once
again what is it you're avoiding and can
I hear a little bit more about that is
there more is there more is there more I
have found over the course of my life
that the longer you sit with a really
deep really pervasive problem and the
more you really get to know it in a
non-judgmental way the more the
solutions that you actually need begin
to naturally Blossom out of that when we
try to strong-arm our own behaviors and
just get ourselves to stop doing what we
don't want to do or stop feeling what we
don't want to feel most of the time we
just create a rebound effect where we
abstain from certain feelings or certain
behaviors for a little bit of time and
then it just comes back two times as
strong later but this process of just
being willing to get to know our own
problems our own avoidance tactics our
own desperation in a really deep
embodied patient way is the process of
building a sense of intimacy and trust
with ourselves
think about the people you don't trust
to help you with your problems so I used
to be the absolute worst person in the
world when it came to taking advice and
to be honest I'm still not great at it
but the reason I was so terrible at
taking advice was because I would not
let people in on the full range of my
problem I would tell them the surface
level I would tell them the tip of the
iceberg then people would start trying
to give me advice and I would just be
like these people are stupid and don't
know anything and the truth was they
didn't know anything because I had not
given them the entire range of the
problem and then a couple of weeks ago I
went to this workshop and we were doing
this exercise where you're just
explaining to someone else a challenge
or a struggle you're going through
and all they do is sit there and listen
and ask you the odd open-ended follow-up
question so all they are doing is
gathering information on your problem
and then more information and then more
information and then at the end of the
exercise the instructor encouraged us to
check in with ourselves and ask whether
we wanted advice from the other person
about the problem or not and if we did
to just ask them hey do you have any
advice for me and as soon as she said
that I was like well I'm not going to
ask for advice I hate advice I never
want advice and then I really looked at
the other person and went they know a
lot about this problem
I've really really been honest with them
about all of these different components
and I think that actually knowing all of
that they might have valuable advice to
give and I was so surprised to find that
the answer in my body to do you want
advice was yes and I think that a lot of
the time this is a problem we face
within ourselves we don't gather enough
information about our own problems
before we shame ourselves for the way
that we're approaching them before we
get mad at ourselves for the coping
mechanisms we're using to move through
them before we really deeply understand
what it is that is leading us to have
these problems or to be in these
particular states in the first place we
just see a part of ourselves that
doesn't match up with the story we like
to tell about ourselves so maybe I like
to tell myself I'm super motivated all
the time and then one week I'm feeling
down I'm feeling dysregulated and
instead of being present with myself and
figuring out why that is I want to stick
to that story of I am super productive
all the time so I force myself to behave
in a way that is inauthentic and going
against my energy and to shove my
natural feelings aside in order to get
work done and stay motivated and keep
that particular idea of myself alive
when in reality I'm creating this
pattern of suffering for myself because
I'm denying the actual root of the
problem that I have not been present
enough with myself to figure out
what was it that threw me off this week
what was it that was making me feel
dejected and unmotivated and down and
depressed and if I don't know that it's
highly likely to crop up again and again
and again until I find a way to get
curious about the problem so in the
video about interpersonal intimacy we
talk about relational curiosity as the
key to fostering interpersonal intimacy
and with self-intimacy the key here is
experiential curiosity that sense of
what is going on for me right now and
even if I don't like it even if it
conflicts with the story I have about
myself or the hypothesis about who I am
that I'm constantly trying to prove
right how can I nonetheless be curious
and sit with that experience and ask
questions to that experience and trust
that my body in this moment knows
something that is important for me to
know even if I don't like it and don't
want it to be true and to trust that
there is a wisdom to my body to my
emotions and to the things that they
pick up on that if integrated is going
to bring me to a place where overall I
function in a better more capable way
even if it means I don't feel good all
of the time a lot of us are very quick
to detach from any feeling we have that
is not the feeling we want to have
I want to feel happy and excited about
this relationship so if my partner does
something that I don't like that I feel
uncomfortable about I might be really
quick to go how do I just spin this in
my mind so it's a positive not a
negative thing and so I don't have to
bring it up and so I don't have to risk
the potential for a conflict or a
rupture to occur
but maybe in reality that conflict or
that rupture has to occur maybe it would
be much healthier for the relationship
in the long run for us to see each other
in that way and for them to understand
what I do and don't need and want and
like and vice versa maybe I've been
working towards a certain end goal for a
while and I arrive there and expect to
feel phenomenal and instead I feel kind
of empty and disappointed and almost
like this letdown of energy that I
wasn't expecting
so what do I do do I fake the happiness
do I tell myself I'm insane and I must
be happy or do I listen to that feeling
and do I learn something
maybe I learned that it's actually the
progress and the moving towards goals
that I enjoy and that the end point
actually isn't the point that feels
exciting to me in which case I can
integrate that information and I can
learn to set up my life in such a way
that I'm consistently working towards
something I feel exciting without the
expectation that arriving there is going
to be the part that is phenomenal and I
can learn to appreciate what I
authentically do appreciate which is the
process so overall this entire process
requires us to get really in touch with
our authentic yeses and no's so the
parts of our experience that feel like a
full-bodied yes I want this and the
parts of our experience that feel like a
full-bodied no this is a boundary or a
limit for me a strong yes is the energy
of being turned on sexually or
emotionally physically being present
engaged curious about where we are and
what's going on around us in an
undefended way we're not scared of what
we're going to find we are are genuinely
curious about what's going to happen if
we pursue a given path the energy of no
often comes up for us in the form of
anger grief resentment disgust even
shame in healthy Doses and this is our
body telling us this is not for me
there's something about this I don't
like I need to set a boundary around and
once that boundary gets set I can step
more fully back into my Yes Energy
because I know where the healthy limits
around that energy exist and I think
that for a lot of us where we start
feeling kind of dead inside is when we
are not aware of where our nose lie and
so the parts of ourselves that normally
come online that get excited and turned
on by the experience of being alive stop
trusting ourselves because we don't know
where the end of that experience will be
knowing our boundaries is crucial to
trusting ourselves to experience
happiness excitement and joy if we don't
have one we're just gonna get scared and
not allow ourselves to have the other
right there is a humongous wealth of
things we can learn about ourselves when
we are willing to stay present with
ourselves through those very difficult
and uncomfortable moments
and that's why the process of
self-intimacy is a never-ending process
just like the process of forming
intimacy with another person because if
you are out in the world living your
life having new experiences you are
going to be feeling new things all of
the time and those new things are always
going to be struggling to find a place
within the ecosystem of who you are and
that ecosystem is always going to be
shifting and changing and growing and so
you are never going to be done the
process of getting to know yourself and
getting to foster a sense of deep
non-judgmental undefended intimacy with
yourself but the cool thing is that once
you learn to go to those places inside
of yourself that you've always been
afraid of that you've always hid
yourself from you've always kind of had
this felt sense of I will die if I look
at that thing
and once you learn that you can look at
that thing and you can survive it you
can keep breathing through it the way
you live your entire life is now subject
to change because when we live our lives
chronically trying to avoid unpleasant
emotions it cuts us off from an
immeasurable range of experiences that
we might otherwise have there is an
absolute superpower in being able to
process pain rejection loneliness
disappointment embarrassment this whole
gamut of emotions that we have
historically thought we would die if we
allowed ourselves to feel
if we can get deeply in touch with all
of those and teach ourselves how to
survive and remain resilient in the face
of them we are now cut off from trying
almost nothing in our lives right we can
take so many more emotional risks we can
take more practical risks we can take
more physical risks because we know that
we have the self-trust we need to be our
own parent through whatever happens as a
result so we no longer have to
chronically try to control our
environments and avoid the feelings we
don't know how to feel because we have
taught ourselves how to stay on our own
team even if the worst happens so
situations that include the possibility
for the worst to happen no longer feel
like the scariest thing in the world and
also the fun part about this is that the
more we make room for the full spectrum
of who we are the more comfortable we
feel doing the same for other people
because we aren't afraid that they're
going to say something or they're going
to notice something about us that is
going to trigger this sense of shame or
disgust or grief that we don't know what
to do with we do know what to do with
those feelings so we can be more open
undefended and unguarded in the company
of people who we trust
and that allows us to have deeper more
intimate relationships and having deep
intimate relationships are actually
incredibly important for fostering a
sense of authentic self-intimacy because
none of us have the Monopoly on
understanding ourselves we need input
and feedback and perspectives from other
people we need 360 degree views of
ourselves in order to understand where
our blind spots are and what work we
need to do next and again this is going
to be a lifelong never-ending process
but it can be a deeply rewarding and
fulfilling process so the fact that it
goes on forever is not necessarily a
negative thing the only way to ensure
that you have a mostly negative time for
the rest of your life is to have very
strong things inside of yourself that
you are terrified of looking at or
recognizing and having to live your
whole life avoiding people situations
connections that might in any way force
you to look at those parts of yourself
because when you are doing that when you
are living your life in avoidance mode
you are cutting yourself off from your
life force the part of yourself that
knows who you are what you want out of
the world what your Cravings are what
your desires are what your interests and
passions are all of that stuff comes
from going into those places in
ourselves and being willing to see the
whole of who we are and continuously
adding Nuance to that so what this is
the process of developing self and other
intimacy is the process of becoming more
and more alive inside of our own lives
we need our yeses and our no's to
understand who we are what we want what
we have to offer the world as well as
what impact we are having on other
people through those offerings and how
we can integrate that into a more
holistic and embodied sense of ourselves
so the process of developing
self-intimacy is the process of
practicing experiential curiosity
staying on the page with ourselves
through discomfort through fear through
even the toughest emotions like shame
and self-disgust and refusing to avert
our gaze from ourselves and instead
sitting in that hiding place getting to
know it and getting really curious and
eventually we might just find that those
parts of ourselves that have been hidden
forever start getting curious themselves
about the world outside of their hiding
place that's the part where Life starts
getting really interesting alright that
is all I have to say for today on the
topic of fostering self-intimacy as
always let me know in the comments it's
coming up for you guys what you're
thinking feeling experiencing as you
watch this I love you I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]
thank you