hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we talk
about how to get more of what we want
out of our lives and our relationships
with both ourselves and other people and
less of what we don't want and today I
want to talk about a concept that I've
had kind of rattling around in the back
of my mind for the past almost decade
now so when I was doing my undergraduate
degree in Psychology I took a particular
class on building healthy relationships
and at one point during a lecture that
he was giving the professor of the class
whose name was Dr Carl Hennig dropped
this line that was something along the
lines of most people stay in bad
situations or bad relationships because
they can't tell the difference between
growing pain and pain pain and I
remember writing that line down and I
never forgot it and over the years I
would kind of continuously return to
that question and ask myself what it
meant what is the difference between
Growing Pains so pain that expands you
and pain that is healthy and moves you
towards what you want in life versus
what he called pain pain or what I came
to call shrinking pain is my own
internal representation of it and that
kind of pain I sort of intuited was the
kind of pain that makes her life smaller
and more contained and doesn't grow you
in any significant way and over the
years as I returned to the question of
how to differentiate between these two
pains I eventually landed on the
definition of this that I'm going to be
using in this video today so growing
pain is pain that aligns you with
reality so pain that gives you true
information about which choices you
ought to be making based on how you
truly feel
shrinking pain or what my professor
would have called pain pain is the pain
of resisting reality so the pain of
trying to do anything but see the truth
and in my opinion that type of pain the
pain of resisting what is real and true
in our lives is the kind of pain that
shrinks our souls down over the course
of our lives and shuts us off from the
people that we could become
versus growing pain the pain of
accepting what is true and honest and
actually happening in our lives as well
as our true honest reactions to what's
happening in our lives is the kind of
pain that might hurt in the short term
kind of like having a really tough
workout does but in the long term aligns
us with reality which includes our true
potential and the positive impact that
we could make on ourselves and the world
and other people and continuously opens
us up to New Perspectives and New
Opportunities because reality and our
feelings and thoughts and relationship
with reality if we are paying attention
is always changing and always offering
us new doors to walk through so for the
rest of this video what I want to focus
on is distinguishing between growing and
shrinking pain because figuring out
which one you're experiencing is the
difference between let's say going to
the gym pushing through the soreness and
then getting stronger versus going to
the gym getting an injury and continuing
to work out on that injury which is
likely going to end up in harming
yourself in some significant way that's
difficult to recover from and the same
goes for emotional or psychological or
spiritual pain there's the pain of
pushing past the difficulty and
awkwardness and insecurity of trying
something new in order to grow into a
stronger more robust version of
ourselves and then there's a pain of
engaging with something that only harms
shrinks and diminishes us the longer we
persist and continue to engage with it
in the same way so just to put things in
slightly more concrete terms off the bat
some examples of what it might mean to
resist reality might be something like
refusing to accept when something that
once made us happy or something that we
once had a lot of Hope about whether
that's a relationship a job a certain
way of approaching our lives and
ourselves and other people is no longer
panning out for us maybe this thing was
once very compatible or we hoped it
would be in the future but the more we
try it on the less it work works for us
we're trying to force ourselves to be
happy with something that we once
thought would make us happy permanently
so this might result in US kind of
putting our blinders on and refusing to
look at what actually is in favor of how
we wish something were and a counter
example of accepting reality and living
in alignment with it means being willing
to feel the tough emotions that come
along with realizing that we are in the
wrong situation or we are approaching
something in a way that isn't working or
we are in a relationship or a career or
some sort of habit or routine that we
were really hoping would be the answer
to something but isn't
and being willing to sit with the grief
of that and the reality of what is even
if it's not the way that we hoped it
would be is what it means to live in
alignment with our present reality and
from that present reality also flows a
ton of new beautiful opportunities that
we may never have realized if we were
staying fixated on the world that we
wanted to see rather than the world as
it is but without further Ado we will go
into five ways that you can tell whether
the pain you're experiencing is the pain
of growth and aligning yourself with
reality or the pain of shrinking and
denying reality as well as why it's
important to actively seek out that pain
that ends up growing us so distinction
number one you're probably experiencing
shrinking pain if the longer that you
engage with a particular situation again
whether that's a relationship a goal
whatever it is the more it hurts and
starts kind of diminishing your life
force so depleting your energy depleting
your ability to come up with new ideas
tackle things creatively to figure out
what might work to get you through
something as opposed to growing pain
growing pain the longer you engage with
it the stronger you get and the reason
that happens is because when the pain
you're experiencing is growing you
because you're aligning with what's
actually happening and the opportunities
that are truly in front of you in real
time it offers you the opportunity to
upskill to gain new ways of doing things
more effectively and to put those things
to use so growing pain is the pain of
your skill set being challenged But
ultimately solidifying and expanding so
that the longer you engage with a given
thing the stronger and more capable you
feel so you might notice that challenges
that you used to struggle with are
starting to feel easy for you and now
you're able to take on more complex
challenges versus with shrinking pain
you're likely to feel more and more
burnt out the longer you engage with a
particular challenge because when we are
resisting reality when we're trying to
force the past onto the present or
whatever it is we are getting
increasingly disconnected from our
energy and our life force and our sense
of self because in order to be the most
vital and engaged and Alive versions of
ourselves we have to be orienting
ourselves to which resources exist for
us in the present moment so emotionally
socially intellectually what are we able
to draw into our world from the
environment that we're actually in and
how do we nourish ourselves with that
stuff if we are engaged and paying
attention we will find those resources
whenever they come along but if we're
resisting reality because there's
something we don't want to accept about
our circumstances we're also going to be
resisting the nourishment that we could
be getting out of reality and so we're
going to feel more and more depleted the
longer we engage with whatever it is
that we're trying to push into existence
so shrinking pain feels like burnout
over a long period of time whereas
growing pain feels like a sense of
strengthening and developing our way
towards new challenges and New
Opportunities so again if you want to
know what kind of pain you're
experiencing in a relationship in a job
whatever it is look at whether your
skill set your sense of energy and
vitality and curiosity is increasing as
time goes on or whether it's decreasing
and you're feeling less aligned with new
opportunities and perspectives rather
than more distinction number two between
whether the pain you're experiencing is
growing or shrinking pain is how much
you have to work to make it make sense
so when we're experiencing shrinking
pain and we're denying some aspect of a
reality that we don't want to face often
what happens is we have to
intellectually jump through a lot of
Hoops in order to make something make
sense so in order to justify a given
relationship a given move we want to
make a given approach to tackling a
problem we have to kind of think and
think and think and often we can find
ourselves thinking in circles and
consistently arriving back at the same
place we started at because the key the
thing that's actually going to make
everything make sense requires us to be
in reality and accept the truth for what
it is so if there's something about my
life that is true that I just don't want
to be true let's say I hate the career
path I've chosen but I don't want that
to be true because it's giving me so
much validation in the eyes of my family
and I want to feel worthy and admired in
their eyes if my brain is refusing to
let me see that because it's too
threatening I'm going to have to
constantly jump through hoops to explain
to myself why I'm not happy even though
I have everything that I claim I want
out of my life I'm going to have to make
up a thousand elaborate theories to
explain that versus growing pain the
pain of acknowledging what is true which
could include things like I don't want
this thing that I wish I wanted right
growing pain means we're aligning
ourselves with what is and so there's
not a lot of confusion about what's
going on even if it's sad to accept the
truth as it is it's usually fairly
straightforward to understand reality
when we're looking at it accurately when
we're not trying to defensively exclude
things that we Don don't want to be true
from our awareness so we don't have to
think too hard we don't have to analyze
or prepare too hard for conversations
when we're living in reality because the
only things we really have to be paying
attention to in order to make decisions
is what's happening and what do I feel
in relation to that so what's happening
in my career and how do I actually feel
about it do I really wish that I liked
doing this for a living but actually I
kind of don't that's all the information
I need to know there's a quote I
absolutely adore from a woman named
Regina Thomas Howard that goes there is
freedom when you know that you're
playing your only card and I kind of
think of living in alignment with our
true feelings as exactly that we are
continuously playing the only card we
have because there's only ever really
one truth but there's a thousand
possible variations or manipulations or
slight adjustments we can make to the
truth inside of our own mind so when we
are experiencing shrinking pain often
what we're doing is like rooting through
this entire deck of cards trying to find
the right combination that is going to
most closely resemble a life that might
work for us when in reality we know that
it's not that complicated there's one
card in that deck that is the trump card
every single time and that card is the
truth and the reason why there is so
much freedom in playing the truth card
is because you don't have to think that
hard about it because you aren't trying
to control all of these things and force
reality to be different than what it is
all you're doing is aligning yourself
with it and then letting whatever
happens next happen and that may be
painful in a lot of circumstances but
that's the kind of pain that ultimately
opens you up to New Opportunities
because now that you've been honest
about who you are and what you want out
of life you're free to start exploring
avenues for getting that and aligning
yourself with new opportunities that are
going to go down a lot more smoothly
than the ones that you are trying to
convince yourself you want when that's
not really true distinction number three
between growing and shrinking pain when
the pain we're going through in life is
shrinking us and it's keeping us
increase increasingly disconnected from
reality and the truth and our own
authentic experience of reality what we
end up doing anytime we feel a sense of
Joy or contentment is clinging to it at
absolutely any cost and or desperately
trying to recreate it over and over and
over because any Joy or contentment we
experience is kind of a happy accident
when we are denying who we are what we
want out of life what's important to us
and we're living out of alignment with
our own true wants needs and values what
we're likely to be doing is creating a
life for ourselves where a lot of the
life is miserable because it's not a
true reflection of us so when by some
happy accident Joy comes along there can
be this sense of panic because we don't
know how to recreate that Joy
intentionally we know that we are not
driving down a road that's going to
naturally produce more of that versus
when we are experiencing growing pain
it's a lot easier to use discernment
about when to indulge in happiness and
joy and contentment because we know that
we are driving down a road where those
feelings are going to naturally get
spontaneously recreated over and over
because the choices that we're making
for our lives are aligning us with the
type of future that we actually want so
when we are resisting reality happiness
and joy feels very scarce because we
know that we kind of found it by
accident versus when we are embracing
reality there's a sense of abundance and
relaxation around positive feelings
because we know that we've been able to
use our discernment about what matters
to us in life to design an overall
experience of living that is
increasingly right for us and aligned
with what we want and that over time
perpetuates more and more joy and
happiness and Alignment so we don't have
to panic and grasp on to Joy every time
we feel it we can let ourselves
experience it lightly and let it go when
it wants to leave because we know
without a shadow of a doubt that that's
going to come back based on the type of
life that we are designing for ourselves
from the inside out fourth distinction
between shrinking and growing pain
shrinking pain or the pain of resisting
reality keeps you connected to your
shoulds in life so if you are not able
to actually tune in and get clear on
what you want out of your life and what
really matters to you the only way
you're going to be able to make choices
is to design kind of a list of things
that you think you should do or a list
of things you think you should want or a
list of rules that you've internalized
from society or your friends or your
family members and to try to guide your
behavior based on those shoulds now the
problem with shoulds is that they aren't
particularly flexible there's nothing
wrong with having general principles for
how we want to live but in order to know
when it's time to adhere to a given
should and when it's time to recognize
that we're in a slightly different
situation and we need to adjust for
context we need to be in touch with how
we actually feel
if we are not in touch with how we feel
we're going to use our shoulds to guide
all of our behavior and when we're doing
that a lot of what we end up doing
consistently can feel like a huge
sacrifice because if we are not tuned in
to where our energy is naturally flowing
out of and towards in the world we're
not going to be aware of what we want to
pursue in life and then over time our
entire lives become this kind of Labor
of obligation instead of a labor of love
right we're always thinking about what
we should want what we should be doing
what we should be forcing ourselves to
be disciplined about and in the process
we might just be making ourselves
increasingly depressed because we
haven't actually checked in in a while
and noticed whether the things we're
claiming we want are actually the things
that are giving us more energy more
vitality and more of that life force or
if we're slowly draining ourselves of it
which is what happens when we live in
alignment with our shoulds rather than
our authentic embodied wants
when we are experiencing growing pain
what we are experiencing is the pain of
moving past some sort of obstacle in
order to get closer to the life that we
actually want in a real deep embodied
way and when that's the way that we're
operating any challenge we take on
becomes a labor of love and even the
sacrifices that we end up making feel
meaningful they don't just feel like
pointless pain which is what happens
when we're making sacrifices that we're
not aligned with or not trading in for
something more meaningful down the line
any path that we choose to walk down in
life is going to include challenge it's
going to include difficult decisions and
it's going to include at some point
trading in something we want right now
for something that we want more later
when we are living in alignment with
ourselves and our authentic wants and
our authentic yeses and no's the things
that we need to trade in in the short
term end up paying off in the long term
because we end up getting closer to the
life that we Act actually do want versus
when we live life through our shoulds
and that shrinking pain of disconnecting
from who we actually are and what we
actually want anything good that we give
up can feel like a tremendous
existentially pointless sacrifice
because we're moving closer to something
we actually don't want and so it doesn't
really feel right in our bodies to be
fighting for it or to be giving anything
significant up in the service of it
including our time our Attention our
youth right growing pain is the pain of
being kind of pulled closer to the life
that we want in the future versus
shrinking pain is the pain of just
losing things that matter to us without
gaining anything significant in return
even if it's literally significant like
status or money if that's not the thing
that we really care about on kind of a
soul level it's not going to feel
satisfying no matter how much we get of
it and final distinction we're going to
talk about today between growing pain
and shrinking pain is that shrinking
pain over time eventually makes you feel
like you are going endlessly in circles
versus growing pain over time makes you
feel like you are endlessly expanding
your point of view and continuously
opening new doors that lead to New
Opportunities and New Perspectives and
new ways of looking at things and
feeling things when we are not
addressing the true underlying problems
that are creating symptoms in our lives
symptoms like depression relationship
issues unhealthy habits addictions
whatever it is when we do not look at
the truth that is underlying our drive
towards those things we end up returning
back to them time and time and time
again because we are dealing with the
symptoms not the root cause of the
symptoms so shrinking pain often ends us
up in this pattern of trying to break
out of negative behaviors negative
situations negative relationships that
are draining us only to find ourselves
back in the same type of situations in a
slightly different form not too long
ahead in the future this is what happens
when we don't address the reality of
what is driving our Behavior when we do
address that reality when we look at the
parts of our lives and our development
and our experiences that are hard to
look at it might feel really painful in
the short term but it allows us to find
the accurate solutions that will help us
truly resolve those issues get over them
and get out of our own way so a lot of
this is stuff like psychological cleanup
work right if I'm projecting all of my
problems onto my romantic Partners onto
my work onto the world I'm going to be
endlessly cycling through this slew of
kind of fake problems it's not that
those things aren't actually painful or
don't actually need to be addressed but
if the underlying problem is that I
can't accept something within myself or
within my own world view so I'm
constantly projecting it onto other
people and trying to resolve my issues
with other people instead of looking
Inward and figuring out what I'm trying
to resolve through all of these messy
situations I'm never really going to get
to the core of it I get to the to the
core of it when I figure out
how to resolve externally that I
actually need to figure out internally
how do I accept that these judgments I'm
always making about other people
actually have a lot more to do with what
I haven't accepted inside of myself and
my own shadow and once I'm able to do
that and make friends with the parts of
myself that I once found really
difficult to accept or acknowledge then
I'm back in reality I'm not constantly
distorting my thinking and endlessly
unconsciously creating these psycho
dramas for myself and when I have that
out of the way I can actually focus on
what matters to me in life I can
actually look at where I am right now
without all of these projections of the
past getting in the way and I can work
with reality as it exists for me today
and in reality today at any point in
time there are endless things that feel
exciting enlivening that we could seek
out that we could explore and discover
and build new things out of and so once
again the longer we walk down this path
the more we strengthen and grow
ourselves when we look at any given
problem for what it actually is and
we're able to presence ourselves enough
to look around and figure out what
resources we have in our current lives
to help solve that deeper more
underlying issue we're able to be so
much more creative than we are if we're
denying the true underlying cause
generally a good sign that we're dealing
with reality and not with some sort of
symptom of an underlying problem is that
we're able to find a lot of Creative
Solutions to our problems but when we're
living from a place of fear and we're
denying a lot of the reality of what's
happening our Solutions are really
limited so we might find ourselves
getting increasingly frustrated with the
fact that we can't seem to resolve
something and we're just going in
circles with it aligning ourselves with
reality means being able to accept when
something is over when something is not
working when there's some sort of pain
or grief we need to feel
being able to lay that to rest inside of
ourselves and then re-center ourselves
to whatever is available to us now and
the cool news is that there is always
always
something really beautiful and
unexpected waiting for us in the present
if we can just make ourselves persistent
and intentional about finding it it's
very unlikely you're going to find
something you're not looking for but to
find the things we're actually looking
for we first have to arrive in reality
and be willing to see whatever is there
alright that's all I have to say for
today on the topic of growing versus
shrinking pain as always let me know in
the comments what's coming up for you as
you go through this video thoughts
feelings questions Etc and as always I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again really soon
[Music]
thank you