hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today we are talking
about anger and I am very excited about
this topic I think that very few people
out there have healthy relationships
with anger at this point in history So
This is highly related to attachment
Theory there are certain types of
distortions when it comes to the way
that we think about embody and process
our anger that are a little bit more
typical to certain attachment Styles so
those on the dismissive avoidant side of
things might be a little bit more prone
to kind of gaslighting themselves around
anger and telling themselves that unless
I have a very clear obvious objective
reason outside of myself why I should be
angry I must not be angry even if your
body is like coursing with angry energy
as you speak and then those on the
anxious side of the spectrum are likely
to to have one of two relationships with
anger one is turning all anger into
vulnerability so instead of ever feeling
angry distressed standing up for
yourself and setting boundaries your
mind kind of automatically turns all
feelings of anger into feelings of
victimization and needing other people
to set boundaries for you or sort of the
exact opposite can be true so those on
the anxious Spectrum tend to either
overdo or underdo anger those who overdo
it assume that every time they feel
angry there must be something that
happened in their environment that is as
extreme and as objectively wrong as the
way that they feel inside so the very
fact that their anger exists and it's
present in their body means that someone
or something else must have caused their
anger and usually that's also
accompanied by the assumption that that
person caused it on purpose but today it
doesn't really matter where the anger
comes from from or what we've
historically done with it what we're
going to be talking about is how to
handle anger in a way that is both
effective and makes your life better I
am a huge believer in getting in touch
with your anger learning from it and
using it to inform your boundaries and
relationships and today we're going to
talk about how to do exactly that no
matter where you are starting from on
this anger Spectrum so the first thing
I'm going to ask you to do in this
process of working with your anger is
accept on a deep level that anger is
nothing more than a sensation in the
body
okay that's all it is it is not a
crystal ball that tells you something
wrong has happened in the world though
it may arise more often in situations
where you're witnessing Injustice but
anger itself what happens in your body
is nothing more than a physical
sensation your anger is not telling you
something specific and objective that
happened your anger is just a response
that is happening to your physical state
which means that if your physical state
is an angry one you are angry it doesn't
matter if you don't know why you're
angry it doesn't matter if it seems to
you like it doesn't make sense that
you're angry or you feel like you
shouldn't be angry if you feel it in
your body you are angry it is there now
if you are angry but don't feel like you
have a good reason it does not mean that
you're crazy or irrational
and on the flip side your anger does not
mean that anybody else is crazy or
irrational anger is also not something
that you have to act on and this does
not mean that I am suggesting you never
act on anger as we go through this video
we're actually going to talk at length
about how to specifically and
effectively Express anger in situations
where you need to show up for yourself
draw boundaries and align your
Interstate with your outer environment
but before we can get to the point where
we are healthily expressing anger we
have to get really clear with ourselves
on what it is anger is just an energy in
the body if you feel it it is there it
doesn't matter if you can justify it or
not it is not something that
necessitates an action and I think that
this is a really important point to
spend some time with for some people
this is actually going to be a really
difficult thing to grasp and my
intuition is that the people who are
going to have the hardest time grasping
the idea that anger does not require
action is going to be those who grew up
feeling responsible for other people's
angry behavior so if you were told as a
child you are making your parent angry
you are the reason why someone is acting
out or yelling or becoming disregulated
there's this instant assumption we make
in our own brains that if someone feels
anger if I do something that makes
someone else angry they are out of
control of their behavior after that
point which means we come to think of
anger as a whole as this absolutely
uncontrollable emotion and I would
imagine people who have that bias
towards thinking that anger and angry
out of control explosive reactions are
always paired are the ones who are going
to be more prone to gaslighting
themselves into pretending they are not
angry when they are clearly angry in
their body why because if you believe
that anger is necessarily paired with
explosive reaction what are you going to
do in order to keep yourself from
reacting explosively you're going to try
to tell yourself that you are not angry
so I'm going to make this point one more
time you can control what what you do
with your anger but you cannot control
whether or not you feel it it is just a
sensation that arrives in the body so I
remember becoming aware of this for the
first time when I had gone on a trip
with a friend who had some health
difficulties and the trip was meant to
be a couple weeks long and after the
first week of the trip this friend had
to leave the trip because they were
feeling unwell and I remember having the
last week of the trip to myself and
having a therapy session while I was on
the trip where my therapist was telling
me you seem a little angry like you seem
like you're upset with your friend and I
was like there is no way I could
possibly be upset with my friend my
friend has Health difficulties I know
that they have a chronic illness I could
never be upset with that person for
leaving the country because they feel
unwell and my therapist went well you
have a great explanation for why you
shouldn't lash out at your friend but
that doesn't mean you don't feel a
little bit angry at how things played
out internally
and that was the first point in my life
where I realized that you can feel anger
in the body over a situation that you
believe your anger is not justified
within you don't have to tell yourself I
don't have the anger in order to not act
on it you can feel it and decide not to
lash out at another person just because
it's present for you you can listen to
it and try to figure out what it's
telling you maybe in that situation my
anger was trying to tell me Heidi you
should have made a plan B for this trip
with this person who you knew might not
be well enough to make it the whole way
through the trip you should have had a
backup plan for yourself in place in
case this person was not able to
continue the trip with you but if I
spend the whole time denying that I have
any anger and trying to change my body
State into something that it's not I'm
going to waste a lot of time that I
could have been spending on listening to
the wisdom of my anger
and in order to get to that place where
we can listen to the wisdom of our anger
we have to first accept that we have it
very often in situations that we believe
we should not have it in and that we
don't necessarily have to act on anger
just because we feel it we just have to
understand it's a sensation in the body
if I feel it it's there that's it what I
do with it from that point is going to
be subject to a lot of discernment so
the second thing I'm going to ask you to
consider when you're looking at your
relationship with anger is understand
that anger has a purpose
anger's purpose is to help us set
boundaries and point towards areas where
we are not showing up for ourselves
anger is a healthy emotion that exists
to help us set boundaries and behave
self-protectively so when dealing with
anger in interpersonal relationships
specifically close interpersonal
relationships that matter a lot to me I
look at anger as a two-step process if I
notice and accept that I'm angry and my
anger is directed towards a certain
action or a certain phrase that someone
else did or said to me and that person
is important to me and I want to keep
them in my life step one will be to
approach that person and let them know
that I felt angry about that thing and
we're going to talk about how to do this
in a very clear explicit way that does
not involve making a whole bunch of
stories that we're trying to get the
other person to agree to about who's
right and who's wrong
but just clearly and cleanly expressing
that I felt angry about this thing that
they did and then asking if there's a
way that we can approach that situation
differently
if that person is open to a discussion
about that and we're able to set some
clear interpersonal agreements about how
to handle those types of situations in
the future then great my anger has
worked in the sense of it has allowed me
to reshape my reality to one that I feel
safer and more free within now step two
of this process that's going to become
particularly important if the other
person is not receptive to working on
the relationship and integrating what I
felt angry about into our overall
relationship is my anger is now there to
tell me you need to set a boundary with
this person around this particular thing
so if someone is being super flaky and
unreliable and I feel angry about it and
I talk to them about it and they're
uninterested in changing now it's my job
to protect my own inner child by going I
am not going to make plans that are time
dependent with this person
if I'm making a plan with this person it
is only going to be and if it works out
for both of us in the last minute kind
of plan it's not going to be a three
days ahead restructure my schedule
around them plan if there's a very high
likelihood that they are not going to
show up on time and that's going to
disrupt the other plans I had for that
day so step one if we want to work with
anger interpersonally is expressing it
and giving the other person the
opportunity to work with us to find a
solution step two if step one fails is
to figure out a way to keep ourself safe
boundaried and protected so that we know
we're not walking into that same
situation again but once again arriving
at this place requires us to accept that
we feel the anger in the first place now
Point number three I want to make before
we get into more specifically how to
express anger is kind of a note on anger
on a more philosophical level
I remember reading a book called coping
with trauma-related dissociation which I
will link in the description of this
video that really blew my mind in a very
particular way in this book the author
talks about how many of us have phobias
of inner experiences or specific body
States so there are actually emotions or
physiological states that we are
terrified of accessing within ourselves
and so the moment a certain feeling
starts arising in our body we might be
willing to do almost anything to
dissociate from or get away from that
feeling and I think it's not unlikely
that many people have an inner phobia of
the experience of anger in which case it
might actually be very difficult for you
to get in touch with the fact that you
feel angry in the first place
so maybe in instances where later on you
feel angry reflecting on them in the
moment what was happening was you were
having a freeze response or a fawn
response I've noticed that one is quite
common for anyone of any gender but
particularly with women around men I've
noticed there is a pattern I've seen in
a lot of my female friends there can be
this sense of in the moment if someone
is saying something to me that makes me
uncomfortable or that I don't like the
instant response is going to be to try
to please that person to keep myself
safe or maybe to freeze and kind of shut
down and Retreat and then it's only
after the fact so way in the future
reflecting on the situation that we
recognize oh I'm actually really angry
about that thing they said to me I'm
actually really not okay with the way
that they were talking to me in that
situation so I remember one time being
in a training session for a particular
group that I was a part of and in this
session one of the men in the group had
said some thing to one of the women in
the group that I felt kind of weird
about like I couldn't quite figure out
what it was that I was feeling at the
time but I knew I didn't really like the
exchange I was watching and then I went
home that night and felt blindingly
angry thinking back to that exchange and
so I went online we had a virtual group
that connected us within the training
program and I expressed that I felt very
angry at this person for the way that
they had spoken to this woman
and the man replied to me and went I
feel frustrated that you didn't say
anything to me at the time this was
happening
and I looked at that comment and went
that's interesting because I actually
didn't realize I felt this angry at the
time that it was happening
so what was going on there because yes
in that moment it would have been the
appropriate time and place to express
the anger but in that moment I was
having a freeze response I was afraid
that if I spoke up and said something
this person would turn their anger on to
me now that I was back home and feeling
more resourced grounded and equipped I
was ready to take on that anger but in
the moment my body knew I was not yet
ready to take it on so it froze me from
even recognizing that that's what I was
feeling and I think that this is very
common for a lot of people we have a
fear response around what will happen in
the moment if we express our anger and
so our body freezes or it fawns or it
flees the situation and then later on WE
recognize what we were feeling in the
moment that our body was protecting us
from and this is not a good or a bad
thing it's just an Adaptive response
it's how you learn to keep yourself safe
early on so I invite you to if you
recognize yourself in this story or in
this response don't judge yourself for
that just use it as information that
particular interaction became highly
useful for me in my own healing work I
started noticing okay the next time I
feel a little bit Frozen in that way or
I feel like something's off but I can't
quite put my finger on what it is is it
possible I'm feeling anger but don't
feel safe to fully experience the
emotion in this situation
and the more you can become aware of
what that feeling is like in your body
of Frozen anger or of anger that is
coming out as a fawn response or a
flight response the more you can become
clear on when you're feeling angry in
the moment that doesn't always mean that
the present moment is the appropriate or
best time to express your anger
especially if you struggle with clear
expression of it but it does mean that
you're going to become a lot more
precise at pinpointing what it is you're
angry about and exactly which situations
your anger is related to which is highly
important for what we're going to talk
about next which is expressing anger
cleanly in order to express anger in a
way that is effective we need to learn
to be extremely precise clear factual
and clean when we are expressing our
anger what most of us naturally do when
we feel anger because we tell ourselves
we're not allowed to just feel and ex
express our emotions is we create a
giant story around why we are right and
the other person is wrong or bad or
manipulative or needs to change and we
tell ourselves that story over and over
again until we have become very mad
about the story itself and then we bring
that story to the other person and try
to argue with them until they agree to
it the problem is that usually by the
point we bring the person the story we
have created a lot of details a lot of
things we're imagining to be true for
them that are probably not that true for
them or that we are getting slightly
wrong and for most people it is actually
pretty triggering to be told a story
about yourself that is in some way
flawed or wrong so when we do this we
are inviting a kind of combative
Exchange in which the other person is
likely to become preoccupied with
defending themselves against the parts
of your story that are untrue and you
end up accidentally burying your own
lead which is that you are angry and not
okay with something specific that was
done
so something that has helped me
immensely with learning to process and
express anger is the philosophy of
radical honesty I've talked about it
before I will put a link in the
description of this video to the book
radical honesty by Brad Blanton if
you've been around here for a while you
have heard me say radical honesty is a
potent chemical use it with caution
there are also things I disagree with
within the philosophy like it is really
not always the appropriate or correct
thing to do to show up at someone's
house and start yelling at them if you
have something to say that you're angry
about that they don't want to listen to
so there are caveats here please use
common sense if you use this philosophy
but what's phenomenal about it is that
it helps you get really clear on what
exactly it is that you're angry about so
what radical honesty suggests you do
when you feel angry is figure out
exactly what happened in real life in
objective shared reality that you feel
angry about and express your anger
Direct exactly about that thing so if
I'm having a conversation with someone
and they start speaking over me so I'm
not done my sentence and they just start
talking directly over me I can go home
and make that mean a million different
things right I can tell myself this
person doesn't respect me I can tell
myself this person is a mansplainer I
can tell myself this person thinks they
know everything and they have no
interest in what I'm saying I can tell
myself a lot of stories and let's say I
bring those stories to the other person
and I'm trying to get them to agree with
them if I'm wrong about those stories
which there's a very high likelihood
that I am we are going to go in circles
forever where they're going to be trying
to justify their character and I'm going
to be trying to force my narrative onto
them because I believe I'm only
justified in expressing my anger if I am
right about this narrative but maybe I'm
not maybe this person is just super
socially anxious or maybe there's some
completely unrelated reason why they
were doing that right so if I go to that
person and only reference exactly what
happened and what I felt about it now
I'm giving us the opportunity to work
with reality so if I go to that person
and say hey the other day I was talking
about a class I'm taking and you started
talking over me and I feel really angry
about that I noticed myself thinking
about it over and over and telling
myself stories about it and I just want
to let you know I felt really angry
about you doing that now we are working
with reality I am pointing at something
that definitely happened how do you know
something definitely happened someone
watching it if it was a scene that was
being filmed on a camera would 100 agree
that definitely happened they could
absolutely pick up on the fact that
while you were speaking another person
was simultaneously speaking and that you
were the one who began speaking first so
as much as humanly possible we want to
be extremely clear about the singular
instance that we felt the anger within
and then we want to express what
happened and the fact that we are angry
about it
you spoke over me the other day I feel
angry about it and the end goal here and
this is very important is not to
manipulate the other person's actions
can you ask for an agreement about
something for sure you can go in and let
the other person know hey I would prefer
if you waited until I was done speaking
for you to start speaking can we agree
on that
however if you are going in expecting
the other person to agree to and endorse
the villain story you have about them
you are absolutely setting yourself up
for a snowball effect of your anger just
getting bigger and bigger and bigger
unless the other person fawns in
response to you in which case their
anger is likely to come back the end
goal of the interaction if you want it
to actually make your life better has to
be just getting aligned in your inner
and outer worlds so it doesn't
necessarily have to be getting the other
person to change maybe they're not going
to change maybe they can't change but if
your goal is going in and getting
aligned with your inner and outer world
so no longer experiencing tension and
chronic resentment and just letting
someone know this happened I'm angry
about it so that you can get over that
anger and move on with your life well
setting boundaries if need be then your
anger is going to work pretty much a
hundred percent of the time if you are
not attached to the outcome of changing
someone one else's Behavior or
manipulating the way that they are
showing up to a way that you like better
and your true honest goal is just
standing up for yourself so you can walk
away with self-respect then your anger
is always going to be a success when you
approach it this way and of course not
every situation is this straightforward
or this simple and there's a lot of
nuance here that we could go into but
the core principle is exactly this find
the fact the thing that definitely
happened State very cleanly and clearly
that you felt angry about it and you are
working with reality
and this is going to give you the best
possible chance of resolving it cleanly
it doesn't mean that it's always going
to lead to something positive in your
relationship but it means it gives you
the best possible shot at it working out
for the best and thing number five that
I want to make super clear about working
with your own anger is you need to start
training yourself to see anger as a
conversation you are having between you
and yourself or your inner child
children speak in feelings they are not
complex linguists yet so when we have
kind of a small abandoned part of
ourselves in the form of an inner child
who is flooding our bodies with
adrenaline and anger they are trying to
get our attention about something they
do not like so do not make the Cardinal
mistake of thinking that your anger is a
signal that you need to try to
manipulate someone else into changing
even if you believe you are morally
justified in doing so I don't suggest
refraining from manipulate because it's
the right thing to do I suggest
refraining from manipulation because it
is the ineffective thing to do the first
time you express your anger cleanly and
clearly to another person you are
offering them the chance to work with
you to repair the relationship
however if they're unwilling to do that
and if you are allowing yourself to go
back over and over again into these
situations where you are being
disrespected by someone else it is now
you who is neglecting your inner child
by refusing to set boundaries and
protect yourself from this other
person's Behavior if you keep putting
yourself in situations where someone is
being unkind to you or emotionally
harming you in some way and you are not
doing anything to take yourself out of
those situations your inner child is
going to get really mad at you because
you are not protecting them or being a
parent to them and you are going to
start to hate yourself now I'm not
moralizing about this I'm not saying you
are a bad shameful person if you don't
know how to protect yourself what I'm
saying is that this is the natural
outcome of failing to do so over and
over that anger gets turned Inward and
it might show up as self-hate as anxiety
as depression and I want to help all of
us avoid all of those really terrible
limiting emotional states by learning to
use our anger to set boundaries the day
we realize that we now have language
boundaries the ability to stand up for
ourselves in the place where we once
only felt confusion angst and rage
because when we are a child and we feel
anger but we don't have the complex
thinking skills to understand exactly
why or exactly how to express it clearly
it it is a revolution because now we can
become the loving inner parents who can
teach our children how to sit with
understand and work with their own anger
which might be something you never
learned when you're an actual child and
that ability to be that person for
yourself is a gift it will open your
life up because when you get in touch
with this part of yourself and you're
able to set clear boundaries you can
move so much more freely in the world
because you know that someone will be
there to protect you if things go wrong
so again think of anger not as a
conversation that is predominantly
happening between you and the other
person but something that is happening
between you and your inner self I
remember there was a point in my life
where I was really starting to work with
anger except it is valid and express it
cleanly and I remember being in a
situation where I had made an agreement
with someone based on a previous
conversation about a way that I was not
comfortable with them speaking to me and
I made the promise to myself that the
next time this happens if it happens
again with this person I will
immediately exit the situation I will
get myself out no matter what we made
the agreement that it wasn't going to
happen again and then what happened it
happened again and the time that it
happened again we were in a car that the
other person was driving on a busy
highway and I told the person pull this
car over at the side of the highway and
I'm getting out of the car this was a
very extreme commitment to my own
self-promise I remember thinking I don't
know how I'm gonna get off this highway
and the other person started like
fawning and apologizing and trying to
make it right in the moment but I knew I
had made that self-commitment if it
happens again I will immediately exit
the situation I will not try to have
this conversation with the person again
I've had it once they know where my
boundaries are if it happens again I'm
out so I got them to pull over let me
out of the car I called an Uber and the
Uber was going to be 65 U.S and I was
like that is so annoying because at this
point in time I am kind of strapped for
cash I don't want to spend 65 on an Uber
when I could have just had a ride from
this other person and then I asked
myself is my inner child worth 65 what
am I actually spending this 65 on it's
not a ride to my doctor's appointment
this 65 dollars is me showing my inner
child I will keep my promises to you
I am paying 65 to earn my own
self-respect and self-trust in this
moment and I don't think I will forget
spending this 65 and I haven't best 65 I
ever spent anger is a conversation
predominantly between you and your inner
child who feels powerless and needs your
help navigating the world in a way that
is safe for them do not neglect that
child do not do it do not do it for
someone else do not do it to save 65 do
not do it under any circumstances
figure out which promises you need to
make to yourself based on your anger and
then keep them and your life will change
your relationship with yourself will
forever change all right I'm gonna end
this video here for today as always let
me know in the comments where you are at
in this process how do you experience
and interact with your own anger or in
what ways do you want to start
interacting with it differently let me
know all of that below as always I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourself and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
thank you