hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here this month on this
channel we've been talking about
intimacy so how to maintain and create
intimate connections with friends family
members loved ones romantic partners and
today we're going to be talking about
something that I believe has a
significant impact on whether or not
we're able to maintain healthy intimate
connections and what that thing is
is our ability to metabolize emotional
pain so what I mean when I say the word
metabolize is essentially being present
with our emotional pain so rather than
pushing it away can we actually sit with
it and find ways to integrate it into
our lives and the better we are at doing
this the better we are also going to be
at staying in healthy intimate
connection because in order to stay in
healthy the intimate connection we need
to have the whole of ourselves online
and available to us and the whole of who
we are includes all of the pain of the
past and all of the pain of the present
and all of the pain that eventually the
future will bring into our lives but
quite a few of us particularly those who
grew up insecurely attached have really
big blocks around healthfully processing
emotion pain and there is absolutely no
judgment here for about 25 years of my
life I avoided emotional pain like it
was the plague it was my full-time job
to never experience or sit with
emotional pain and it created nothing
but more problems in my life the longer
I did that so what we're going to talk
about today is how to not get stuck in
that trap because very often when we do
get stuck in that trap of avoiding pain
the pain comes out anyway but we often
end up unconsciously or accidentally
offloading the pain onto the people who
are closest to us so today we're going
to talk about how to avoid that trap for
the first part of this video we're going
to look at what happens when we don't
know how to metabolize and be present
with pain and then in the second half of
the video we're going to talk about how
to start an upward spiral where we are
able to integrate the lessons that are
often incredibly important that pain is
there to teach us so I want to base the
entire premise of this video on this
quote by John Green that says the thing
about pain is that it demands to be felt
so this is a line from the fiction book
The Fault in Our Stars but I think that
it is pointing directly at the heart of
a very deep truth which is that when
emotional pain comes into our lives we
do not have the option to not experience
it
the only options we get are whether we
are going to deal with it consciously or
unconsciously often when we deal with it
unconsciously we end up accidentally
subjecting all of the people around us
to completely unnecessary pain rather
than dealing with it consciously and
intentionally in a way that actually
enriches our ability to be present and
there for the people in our lives so
we're going to start off by looking at
what it looks like when we can't do that
conscious processing because we have not
been shown a model for it so we're going
through life and a moment of pain arises
right this could be something very
significant it could be something like a
loss or a betrayal or a death so
something that really
regulates our system in a way that we
find incredibly unpleasant and our
options in this moment are to either
stay present with the pain which we're
often only able to do if we have learned
how to do that through example or
through intentionally cultivating the
skills that we're going to talk about
today or our bodies become overwhelmed
and go immediately into avoidance
tactics around the pain now this is not
the same as attachment avoidance though
it can overlap with it so we're going to
make another distinction here we can
avoid the pain either through repressing
the pain so this is what happens when
something comes into our system and our
system decides this is too much for me I
can't deal with it I'm going to block it
out of our conscious awareness and tell
myself this is fine it doesn't hurt me
make up some story about why the pain
doesn't matter and move on with things
or we can go into externalizing when
we're externalizing our pain we're aware
that it's there we're aware that we
don't feel quite right
but we don't feel as though we ourselves
are capable of dealing with the pain so
we project it onto some other person or
some other situation and we try to work
it out externally instead of internally
and we can either become dependent on
other people to caretake us emotionally
so we're going to go out into the world
looking for a savior because
unconsciously we believe that if we find
that savior we can bypass ever feeling
the pain or we're going to go out into
the world and look for someone to
project that pain onto so that we are
working it out interpersonally through
fighting and arguing and blaming another
person for our pain rather than once
again being able to sit with it and on
the other side of things when we are
repressing our pain this can cause two
very distinct problems in Intimate
Relationships one is that anywhere we
have pain that we have told ourselves we
do not have pain or that it doesn't
matter to us that something bad happened
to us
we are going to be completely intolerant
and unempathetic with other people who
are experiencing that same pain in their
lives so when we get into close
relationships if we are people who have
walled ourselves off from feeling and
giving ourselves empathy around the pain
that we have experienced in life we're
also going to be walled off from giving
other people that empathy and so now the
other person who is coming to us for
support and co-regulation is going to be
the one who is processing our pain on
our behalf when they get shut out in
those moments alternately we might
displace our pain onto someone else so
find another person who looks like they
are in pain in a similar way to how we
have once been in pain and become
incredibly over involved in trying to
fix their pain because we tell ourselves
unconsciously if I can resolve this
inside of this other person where it
feels safe safer to approach it then I
don't have to deal with my own I will
have fixed this pain through someone
else so rather than looking for a savior
we try to become one for other people
and all of these options projection
dependence getting over involved in
someone's pain denying other people's
pain all of these end up putting the
pain that we could not metabolize and
process ourselves onto someone else they
do it in different ways but at the end
of the day pain demands to be felt and
so it gets felt but it gets felt by the
people around us not just us so what
we're going to talk about next is how to
make sure that we are not making this
happen that we are not avoiding our pain
and unintentionally offloading it onto
other people and the people we tend to
offload it on to the most significantly
are Intimates so our close friends our
partners our family members the people
who we are least afraid will leave us if
we expose them to our pain but this
massively gets in the way of intimacy it
creates conflicts in our relationships
that don't need to be there and it also
robs the people in our lives of the
chance to really know us because a big
part of who we are is that pain
everything that happens to us in life
lives inside of us so if we have shove
something away into a dark corner that
we don't go into anymore we are robbing
the people we're close to of the
opportunity to truly know us and we're
robbing ourselves of the exact same
thing so we're unable to develop that
self- intimacy when we have
unmetabolized pain we don't really know
on a deep level who we are or what we
have to offer the world if there's areas
of our psyche that we absolutely cannot
and will not travel into so how do we
start doing a different thing how do we
learn in that moment of pain first
through intentional practice ice and
then later on it might come more
naturally to stay present with our pain
instead of disconnecting from it the
first step is accepting that core
premise on a deep level so getting real
with yourself when something upsetting
happens in life when grief arises when
loss or betrayal or heartache arises and
going this pain is going to get felt it
does not matter if I avoid it it does
not matter if I deny it it will come out
but I can recognize that I have a choice
in this moment about how it comes out I
can take the Reign on my own experience
of pain and choose to move through it in
a way that is best for both myself and
everybody around me and so the first
step in this process is consciously
making room for pain so in that moment
where something goes wrong where
something goes off the rails in our
lives where something unexpectedly bad
happens we have the opportunity in that
moment to welcome the pain in and ask it
what it needs from us and what that
means is making tangible accommodations
in our lives for pain and grief so the
last time something really unexpected
and surprising and terrible happened in
my life I remember meditating on the
question how long does this grief want
to be with me and the answer that kind
of intuitively came to me was 6 months
something inside my body went I think
I'm going to be wrestling with this for
about 6 months and the next question
that I asked myself was how can I be as
intentional as possible when it comes to
making room for grief inside of my life
over the next six months so how do I
make sure that I have regular
checkpoints where I know that I will be
taking time specifically to attend into
my own pain because if I do not do that
if I do not use the actual tangible
resources that I have to attend to this
grief which are things like time money
energy I will end up spending all of
those things on the grief
unintentionally it will leak out of me
in unconscious ways so to start thinking
about what you might need in order to
metabolize pain think about what a child
would need in your situation so if a
child experienced something like the
loss of someone they loved whether it's
to death or to divorce or to some other
circumstance what would you want to do
to help that child move through this
process so that it does not become a
trauma for them what children often need
is protection structure and comfort so
they need their pain to be seen they
need to know it's okay that it's there
they need a degree of leniency so they
need to understand that it's okay if we
put a little bit of a pause button on
some areas of our lives in order to feel
and be present with this pain and it's
also okay to make plans and keep life
moving in the background as we're moving
through grief and there's no one formula
for this because what we need in order
to metabolize pain is going to be
totally different personto person but
you might want to pay attention to the
fact that if you are not securely
attached you might need resources that
you've never had in order to learn to
metabolize pain so you might need to
seek out the help of a counselor or a
therapist or a support group or you
might need to pick up some books on how
to move through difficult periods of our
lives so I want to note that this is not
necessarily going to be easy you might
have to go on an exploration journey of
figuring out how how and in what ways
you're able to integrate pain into your
life and to welcome it in maybe it looks
like you going okay I'm going to allow
pain to disrupt my plans a bit I'm going
to take some time off work or I'm going
to spend some money on going to a coach
or a therapist or I am going to go
around asking everybody I can think of
hey have you ever been through an
experience like this and what would you
recommend I do in order to help myself
through this experience which is
different than asking them to take away
your pain right you're asking them for
advice on how to stay more connected to
it again this stuff does not come
intuitively to all of us but the process
of going out and seeking that resource
for yourself is giving your inner child
an incredibly strong message which is
that I am going to protect you from this
I'm going to comfort you around this I'm
going to find a way to make this pain
make sense to us so that it does not
become a trauma that we are perpetuating
on to other people I am raising you to
be a better person than that so we need
to change our mindset here to really
understand what it means to be present
with something when we love something
what we naturally do is place our
focused attention on it and in order to
metabolize our pain as strange as this
is going to sound we have to love it we
have to be willing to spend time with it
to believe that it matters and deserves
our attention and we have to be willing
to consciously and intentionally place
our attention on it and what's super
interesting is that often we find when
we go into the pain and we actually stay
with it it is much less scary than all
of the meta feelings that we have around
pain so a meta feeling is a feeling that
we have about another feeling and quite
a few of us especially those of us who
air towards the repression of emotional
pain often have a sense of panic and
fear come up when we feel pain and that
sense of panic and fear like something
terrible is going to happen if I go into
this pain is often actually a lot more
psychologically painful than the pain
itself so when I think about going to
the heart of emotional pain I have this
memory I always return to of this hiking
trip that I took one time where I was
doing a multi-week solo trip and at one
point I ended up tripping over something
and twisting my knee in a way that I
knew was going to need medical attention
it wasn't broken but it was in a lot of
pain so I was hiking over this hill and
there was a village on the other side of
the Hill that I knew I could go into to
get medical attention but in order to
get there I had to descend a very steep
incline and it didn't matter how careful
I was with my steps every single time
that I had to put weight on that knee it
was excruciatingly painful and so what I
did was I turned on my phone and I
started listening to an audio book by
pemma Shin I believe this one was the
places that scare you but in any case I
will link her audiobooks in the
description of this video because they
are phenomenal and in the book it was
talking about staying present with all
emotions and a tactic she recommended
was just naming what's present for us in
our experience when it comes up and so
every time I stepped on that leg I would
go pain and then I would step again and
go oh my God pain and one of the coolest
things that has ever happened to me
happened to me in that moment on that
hike which is that the more I screamed
pain inside of my head and it some
points out loud the more my pain started
to evaporate but it wasn't so much that
the pain itself was evaporating it was
that all of the anxiety and stress that
I felt around the pain seemed to be
floating away the more that I
acknowledged it and I realized that
physical pain while it's deeply
uncomfortable is not always quite as bad
as the feelings that we have about our
physical pain by simply acknowledging to
myself very intentionally that I was in
pain it was like it boiled The
Experience down to only the pain as
opposed to all of the things surrounding
it and this is still a tactic that I use
to this day anytime I am in emotional
pain
I stop and I go pain pain pain and I let
myself name it over and over again or
maybe grief loss Panic anxiety just
simply being willing to name and welcome
pain into our awareness is a massive
first step towards being able to stay
present with it because we actually get
to the core of what it is and we allow
all of the meta feelings around it which
can come in and jumble up our experience
of pain like no other to get out of the
way and allow us to access the pain
directly so the last time I went through
something that was causing me an extreme
amount of distress so this thing that
told me it was going to take 6 months I
decided to start making dates with my
pain so I went out and bought this
really beautiful journal and then every
evening before I went to sleep I would
write down this is what the pain looks
like like today and then I would draw
whatever picture felt like it best
represented my inner world at that
moment some days pain felt like being
lost in a foggy forest and other days it
felt like being tossed around in the
ocean and other days it felt like
finding a temporary clearing inside of
that forest or seeing a little bit of
sun breaking through the clouds and what
was really interesting is that the more
I paid attention to my pain the more I
carved out time and energy to focus on
it specifically the more I found that my
pain was starting to tell me a story
back to me so when I flipped through the
pages of this book I was learning things
about myself and about the world and
about different perspectives that pain
gives us that I could not have arrived
at had I not spent time listening to the
pain and this is exactly what it means
to meet ourselves deep
when we are willing to go into even the
most uncomfortable experiences that
we're having what we find is New Self
resource inside of there so there is a
spiritual teacher named Tara Bratch who
you may have already heard of if you
follow my channel but she has incredible
philosophies around radical acceptance
so accepting and welcoming into our
experience whatever is happening for us
and she's someone who has been really
instrumental in my ability to stay
present with pain and not just stay
present with it but assume that it has
something to teach me to assume that
whatever I'm currently experiencing is
the most important thing that I could
possibly be present with so Tara Bratch
tells this story that I really love
about these two monks who are climbing
up a mountain and one of the monks gets
injured and the other one has to decide
whether he's going to Summit the
mountain or stay with the other monk in
his pain and the monk decides to stay
and the moral of the story is that the
summit of our experience lies inside of
whatever we choose to be present with so
often when we look at life as this
series of kind of goals that we want to
reach or things we want to achieve what
we're really telling ourselves is I will
be present in my life once I get there
and there are times where this is okay
but there are also times where it helps
us to stop and acknowledge it's time for
me to let go of that imaginal reality
I'd created that I promised myself I
would be present in and it's time for me
to attend to this moment because this
moment however unexpected and however
painful is the most important experience
I could possibly be having because it's
the one that is happening so anytime we
have something highly dysregulating that
comes into our awareness anger pain fear
grief stress it is already too late to
avoid that thing if it has shown up it
is now the summit of your experience and
you are never going to find that other
Summit through avoiding this one you
have to stop and be willing to go
through it so this means developing a
sense of intimacy with your own pain and
listening really closely to what lessons
might be there for you to glean from it
we thought reality was going to be one
way now it's another way okay what can
we learn from that what can we learn
about ourselves from that what can we
learn about the world from that in what
ways is the experience of this pain
allowing us a deeper form of connection
to ourselves air go other people because
guess what everybody on Earth has
experienced deep pain and often we have
this fear that feeling pain that going
through something challenging is going
to cause us disconnection from other
people when in reality this is one of
the deepest and truest things that it's
possible for human beings to connect on
currently in this exact moment there are
millions of people out there
experiencing deep pain all
simultaneously and so many of them
probably think that they're alone in it
when in reality they are tapped into
something completely Universal and
completely human so as terrible as it
feels to Bear pain in the moment that
we're experiencing it to allow ourselves
to grieve and cry and rage sometimes and
feel how completely unjust the universe
is if we can allow ourselves to stay on
the page with all of that and to make
friends with our own pain now we're
going to be contributing to building
something inside of us that allows us to
access compassion and empathy rather
than avoidance and offloading when we
encounter pain
again and this is how slowly the world
becomes a better place when we stop
externalizing our pain and learn to
integrate it so that the cycle of pain
ends with us now this doesn't mean that
we don't set boundaries it doesn't mean
that we don't get really angry sometimes
but it means that we stop trying to get
other people to take our pain away
because when it shows up we metabolize
it we feel it we learn from it and then
we go back into the world and we set our
new boundaries and we choose our New
Paths
accordingly so this leads us to the
final step in the process which is about
reconnecting to hope when we avoid pain
what we are accidentally doing is
staying connected to a form of hope that
no longer exists in reality we are are
keeping this mental image of something
that was once wonderful and available to
us present in our minds by refusing to
process the loss and by virtue of doing
that we are avoiding the truth of the
present moment the truth of the present
moment is that as soon as pain or grief
has arisen for us it is already there we
cannot fix it through having an argument
we cannot fix it through avoiding the
problem we cannot fix it through shoving
it away in a dark corner of our cyle
pyes and going to find something else in
the world that takes the conscious
experience of pain out of our awareness
temporarily as soon as something in our
lives has died or caused us grief or
pain it already exists reality is
already changed forever and what we are
doing when we sit with that pain is we
are laying to rest what we thought
reality was going to look like we are
being present in that Summit of Our
momentto Moment experience with what
reality actually looks like in this
moment and the cool thing about that is
that it allows us to let go of what's
already gone and it frees us up to
re-engage with the new types of Hope and
possibility and opportunity that do
exist within the present there are times
when hope is going to come and naturally
arise inside of us and there are other
times when we need to go after hope with
a club I implore us all after we have
done this process of sitting with our
pain giving ourselves the time we need
to attend to it and to move through it
to then make an intentional practice out
of engaging fully and proactively with
finding new things to hope for so I kind
of see this as the process of
uninstalling an old program that we had
running internally around what we were
hoping for in life and then reinstalling
hope but with a different program so
hope is going to look different now that
you've gone through this process you're
going to have different things to work
towards and to feel impassioned by this
is how we become version 2.0 of
ourselves after we go through pain we
don't have to end up these empty shells
of people who are running away eternally
from that which we are afraid of we
don't have to become people who live in
the past we can become people who move
through the darkest moments of our lives
with our eyes open who learn and
integrate what those moments and those
experiences have to teach us and then we
take everything that we learn inside of
that pit of despair and we bring it out
into the world we find new people to
engage with who understand what we've
been through who we can now connect with
in a deeper way we find new
opportunities for ourselves and ways to
make sense of the experiences that we've
had and potentially contribute in better
ways to the World by virtue of having
gone through them we look for new
opportunities that would be more fitting
for the person we are now because pain
changes us the only choice that we get
is how it changes us does it change us
into a bitter person who is holding on
to an idea of the past that is already
long gone or does it change us into a
stronger more integrated more centered
person who has better discernment and
makes wiser choices for themselves and
is also able to empathize with the
people around them more deeply this
option is an upwards spiral and the cool
thing is that we can choose it at any
point in time we can choose to go back
and attend to past pains with this
degree of presence and intention we can
choose it the next time pain arises for
us and it will and the more we stay open
to this process the more the people
around us are able to witness what it
actually looks like to confront and
integrate pain and that ends up serving
as a much better template for how to do
it than us trying to savior them from
their pain ever would so this creates a
net positive result in both your
intimate relationships and your
experience of Life as a
whole all right I think I'm going to
leave it there for today on the topic of
metabolizing pain let me know in the
comments any thoughts feelings
perspectives you have coming up as you
move through this as always I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really
[Music]
soon