hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
for the next month and a half on this
channel we're going to be talking about
neuroticism and
self-regulation specifically how the
neurotic patterns of thinking and
feeling that we might develop over the
course of our lives are actually our
best attempts at self-regulation when we
don't have a clear understanding of what
is happening for us unconsciously so to
get us started on topic I first want to
differentiate it from the big five
definition of neuroticism so if you
don't know what the big five is it's a
system that looks at personality through
five different dimensions one of them
being called neuroticism and that is not
what we're talking about here today
though there might be significant
overlap with the Big Five's definition
of neuroticism and the type of
neuroticism that we're exploring here
what we're exploring here is essentially
the original definition of ticism so
this term harks back to the era of
Freudian psychology and a lot of what
I'm interested in exploring over the
course of this series is the more
youngian interpretation of this term so
Carl Young spent a lot of time looking
at how the conscious and unconscious
mind interacted with each other and
which problems arose in our lives by
virtue of that which was not consciously
available to us so a lot of what Young
or Freud would have considered neurotic
we would now give a more specific DSM
diagnosis to but essentially neurotic
Behavior patterns can be thought of as
things that we do compulsively or things
that we might think of as self-sabotage
so things like addictions perfectionism
ruminating thoughts compulsive behaviors
rigid patterns of thinking or behaving
obsessions liant thought patterns
essentially any part of our psychology
where we are making a poor relation
between our subjective inner world and
the world of things and people outside
of ourselves so the way that I think of
neuroticism and neurotic behaviors or
neurotic thought patterns is that it's
our best attempt at self-regulation in
the absence of a proper and accurate
understanding of how our inner
subjective World largely our world of
feelings and inner states is connected
to the world outside of us so the world
of people people and objects and
neuroticism can be thought of as the
mental and emotional pain that we
experience often in a very deep and very
persistent way when we're unable to
resolve our problems directly or when
we're unable to take ourselves out of
painful emotional states directly
because we don't have a clear idea of
what in our external World those
internal painful states are related to
so we're going to look at a bunch of
reasons why we might develop Neurosis as
well as how we can start interacting
differently with deep unconscious wounds
in a nutshell young thought of neurosis
as problems that were not fully
conscious so the difference between a
conscious problem and a Neurosis is that
a conscious problem is something that we
can look at the pros and cons of and
weigh them out inside of our minds and
make a logical and rational decision
that integrates how we feel about how to
solve the problem and how to move
forward even if we don't have the best
possible solution but when we were up
against a Neurosis essentially what's
happened is that some part of the
problem has gone underground and is not
in our conscious awareness so young has
a quote that goes the neurotic is ill
because he is unconscious of his
problems and young believed that someone
became neurotic through a three-step
process step one is that the person was
confronted with a problem in some
significant area of their life so some
area where this problem really has to be
worked through in order for you to have
a fulfilling well-rounded life so this
could be a work problem a relationship
problem a problem that's a little bit
more abstract like developing a sense of
self or individuating from your parents
and your family of origin but
essentially step one was that a
significant problem arose for you in
life step two was that you failed to
confront that problem directly
the problem was evaded in some way
rather than dealt with and in the way
that Neurosis was originally
conceptualized in the era of Freud and
young there was a very negative slant to
this that kind of chocked up an
inability to confront problems directly
to a character weakness or just having a
weak will so it was kind of framed as
you had this problem you could have
dealt with it but you chose not to out
of fear or cowardice and this is today
where we're going to slightly diverge
from Young I believe that now now at
this point in history with the plethora
of information that we have about early
childhood development that was not
available back in the era of Freud and
young we can look at this slightly
differently and we're going to get into
that soon but essentially what we can
agree on here is that when a life
problem is evaded because for whatever
reason whether it is a weak will or some
of the other reasons we're going to talk
about as this video goes on you cannot
directly confront a problem what tends
to happen is you develop a defense
mechanism that shoves the problem out of
your conscious awareness so some of the
ones that young gave his examples were
repression projecting numbing out in
some way when we encounter the problem
doing compulsive types of activity that
keep the problem out of our awareness if
we're super busy all the time or super
obsessed with something else maybe the
problem doesn't have time to make it
into our conscious awareness
unconsciously avoiding situations that
might trigger an awareness of the
problem or misplacing the emotions that
we feel around the problem onto other
people or other objects in our
environment and we're going to focus
really strongly on that one today
there's a quote I really love by a man
named Kenneth tinan that goes a Neurosis
is a secret you do not know you are
keeping so this is when we have some
want some need some desire some emotion
some impulse whatever it is that lives
in our body and is being registered by
our emotional system but that our
conscious mind is not fully aware of and
according to Young this leads to a fear
of life based on a disturbed or
diminished process of adaptation so
essentially if we do not learn the
skills that we need to face the
challenges of our lives directly we
develop fear and anxiety about the
process of living and a wide range of
habits or thought patterns that are
aimed at attempting to control and
contain our experience of life rather
than authentically and spontaneous L
engage with it and one of Young's
Hallmark quotes on the topic is all
Neurosis are a substitute for legitimate
suffering so now we're going to start
unpacking what it looks like to suffer
illegitimately or in a neurotic way
versus what it looks like to get in
touch with your true emotions your true
experience of reality and to begin
suffering
legitimately the opposite of neuroticism
can be thought of as an align ignment
with reality and the ability to
self-regulate based on an accurate
connection to reality so if we are not
neurotic at all what it means is not
that we never feel pain or never suffer
but it means that we are understanding
clearly what our pain is related to and
which actions we can take to best manage
it so the goal is not to get rid of your
feelings when we cure ourselves of
neurosis we will still will have a wide
range of feelings and a lot of them will
be unpleasant but we'll be able to
associate our feelings with the right
things so what we're going to be talking
about a lot throughout the course of
this video and the course of the next
month and a half is what self-regulation
looks like when we are self-regulating
essentially it means that we are
reasonably aware of our own emotions as
well as where our emotions are coming
from and we're at choice to a reasonable
extent around how we want to deal with
our emotions so we're not necessarily
reacting quickly out of impulse we're
not reacting from a place of trigger we
are for the most part able to tell what
we're feeling when and then we're also
able to make Intelligent Decisions
around how we want to deal with that
emotion including when we want to do
things like strongly Express an emotion
versus when we want to not express it so
this doesn't mean that we're always
inhibiting our emotions it just means
that our emotions are not controlling us
we are in the driver's seat of how we're
responding to our emotions the problem
is that if certain emotions or a lot of
different emotions are repressed for us
we are not going to be at Choice when it
comes to how we respond to them because
we're not going to be sure exactly what
it is that we are feeling so I kind of
liken this to having a vitamin
deficiency if you don't know anything
about nutrition let's say that we are
living in a world where the field of
nutrition was ever invented and people
just don't really know much about what
foods we need in order to serve which
functions biologically if one day your
hair started falling out in clumps
because you had a vitamin deficiency but
you had no idea that there was such a
thing as a vitamin deficiency you might
get really obsessed with asking yourself
the question what is wrong with my hair
why is it falling out in huge clumps in
the shower and you might get really
fixated on trying to find the right
shampoo or trying to find the right hair
care routine that would stop your hair
from falling out when in reality your
hair is actually responding perfectly
appropriately to the vitamin deficiency
so it is following the laws of science
perfectly there is nothing wrong with
your hair the problem is that there is
an underlying need in your body for a
certain vitamin that is going
unsatisfied and so it is causing your
hair to fall out and this is very
similar to the experience of neurotic
habits often the thing that we get
really fixated on because it's the thing
that we most visibly see the results of
or feel the consequences of in our daily
life is actually not the root problem
and so the more we fixate on it the more
we fixate on finding the right shampoo
the more we are actually going in the
wrong direction so we're going to bring
this into the realm of psychology just
like it's possible to not know about the
field of nutrition and have no awareness
of the fact that a vitamin deficiency
can lead to hair falling out it's also
possible to have humongous blind spots
when it comes to what keeps us
psychologically healthy and when we have
blind spots in that area and there's
certain psychological vitamins we aren't
getting we're not necessarily going to
understand why we keep feeling the same
types of pain over and over again so an
example is let's say as a child you
didn't learn about assertiveness you
didn't learn that it is an absolutely
crucial part of Human Relationships to
be able to check in with yourself say no
when you don't want to do something and
design your life around the types of
things that you authentically do want to
do and the types of people that you
authentically want to be around so we
can think of this concept of saying no
and being assertive as an essential
vitamin that we need psychologically
Ally in order to stay healthy if you do
not have this vitamin you are going to
start experiencing severe and recurrent
consequences so you might find that you
are chronically doing things you don't
like doing or being around people you
don't like being around and you might
find that you are chronically distressed
by that and chronically needing comfort
from other people and you might have
this idea in your head why am I so needy
why is it that I'm constantly needing to
be comforted by people when the people
around me don't seem as distressed as I
do and they don't seem to need as much
care and support as I do and this is
equivalent to noticing that your hair is
falling out but not knowing what the
root causes your emotional system is
actually responding perfectly normally
to constantly doing things you don't
want to do and being around people you
don't want to be around that is
naturally disregulated and when we are
disregulated we naturally need comfort
from other people or from ourselves so
you might look at this as I just need to
be less needy I need to reach out to
people less I need to seek less comfort
and this is the equivalent of looking
for the right shampoo that is going to
stop your hair from falling out your
hair is doing the right thing based on
the vitamin deficiency and you are
needing the appropriate level of comfort
for a person who is living a life
they're unhappy insid of but the way to
solve the problem is not to learn to be
less needy the way to solve the problem
is to figure out what vitamin you're
missing and give yourself that if you
learn how to practice discernment and
say no when you want to say no you are
eventually going to need much less
comfort from other people because you
are not going to have the problem of
being chronically dissatisfied with the
choices that you're making so a Neurosis
can be thought of as whatever problem we
get fixated on that is not the root
problem that we are trying in vain to
solve the pain of the root problem
through so again trying to find the
right shampoo when in reality we need
more vitamin K or trying to be less
needy when in reality we need to find a
way to be more satisfied with our lives
so that we're not chronically unhappy
and in need of comfort and this is where
we're going to start blending
developmental psychology with Young's
conception of neuroticism so remember if
wek back to his idea that neurosis
develop as a product of facing some
problem in life that we choose not to
face up to directly what I want to talk
about now is why that might happen
besides us just being weak willed I
believe that a lot of problems in life
that we do not face up to directly
actually happened because we have a
blind spot around the skill that we
would need in order to face up to that
problem directly so again if you never
learned assertiveness as a skill it's
not not going to occur to you to be
assertive in a situation when you need
to be that situation is not going to
strike you as now is the time to be
assertive that situation is going to
strike you as now is the time to submit
to what somebody else wants you're not
going to recognize it as a challenge
that could be overcome in this way so my
theory on why we often fail to face up
to the problems in our life directly
starts with our developmental blind
spots at some point in our development
in some significant way we fail to make
an accurate connection between our
internal state so what's going on for us
in our subjective inner world and our
external environment so what our inner
state is responding to in our
environment usually because the people
that we are looking to to get
information about that are not
necessarily clear on it themselves or
they're not able to properly
contextualize it for us essentially what
happens is we either internalize
something as normal when it is not
normal or we internalize something as
not normal when it is normal and both of
these conditions are going to skew our
perception of how our inner state is
connected to our outer environment so I
will give some examples of this because
it's much easier to explain through
example than through Theory let's say
you grew up in a household where one of
your caregivers is chronically
emotionally abusive to the other
caregiver ier but you are never told
that what is happening between these two
caregivers is a pattern of emotional
abuse what you are taught is that this
is a normal healthy relationship maybe
nobody says that overtly but because
nobody says anything to the contrary you
believe that the way your one parent
talks to the other parent is perfectly
normal and maybe the main reason you
believe that is because when the
emotionally abusive parent says
something unkind or derogatory or
insulting to the other parent the other
parent does not react maybe they have a
pattern that causes them to withdraw and
shut down in the face of verbal abuse
and so you internalize their lack of
reaction as this is just a normal way
that people speak to each other the
problem is that when someone insults us
or when they say something to us that is
not true about our character or when we
are projected onto our bodies do react
to that our systems know and deeply
understand that there is a danger to
being seen in a negative and inaccurate
Way by someone we are close to so if
that parent now insults us or is
derogatory towards us our bodies are
still going to clock that as a threat
but our conscious minds are not
necessarily going to clock it as a
threat our conscious minds are going to
go my parent is behaving towards me the
exact same way they behave towards my
other parent and I've learned through
looking at my other parent that the
appropriate response to this is to
Simply ignore it and go on with my life
and so when it happens I'm not going to
understand consciously why I feel
disregulated as far as I'm concerned
nothing of real consequence has happened
to me so if I am feeling a strong
emotional response it is just because I
am crazy or irrational in some way
because again nothing out of the
ordinary is happening but again that
feeling is still present in the body
maybe my body feels tense and angry
maybe it feels threatened and scared
maybe it feels disgust or shame but
essentially now we have a mismatch
between our physiological State and what
we believe is happening in our conscious
mind and that mismatch has to get
resolved somehow and if we are not
conscious of it we will resolve it
unconsciously so we might suddenly find
ourselves in a pattern of over eating or
of drinking too much alcohol or of
really desperately craving validation
out of other people that we are good and
okay but we might not understand why we
are desperately craving any of that
because we have no idea that something
is happening to us that is eliciting our
normal responses when we have a need for
Comfort if we had an awareness that the
way we were being spoken to was actually
causing our disregulation we could deal
with the problem directly we could set
up boundaries and say you can't speak to
me that way and particularly if we are
adults we can remove ourselves from
situations where people are speaking to
us that way or projecting on to us in
that way we could go talk to a friend or
a therapist and explicitly seek out
comfort and validation but again if we
have no idea why our body suddenly feels
antsy or on edge or just off we are
going to assume that we are just having
a random or crazy
emotional reaction and we're going to
talk about how that can lead to neurotic
patterns of thinking and behavior after
a few more examples an example of
internalizing something as not normal
when it is normal might look something
like let's say you grew up in a
household where you were very
significantly emotionally neglected so
you never really had a felt sense of
what it's like to be in Intimate
connection with another person and to be
really deeply seen and mirrored and
understood so you don't have any
framework any template on a sematic
level for what it feels like to get
close to someone and maybe what happened
for you as a child is that you were for
the most part left alone but maybe your
parents came around and paid attention
to you if they were scolding you or if
they were criticizing you in some way or
if they were otherwise trying to correct
your behavior and so now as an adult you
might experience a lot of trouble in the
realm of getting close to people because
if your model of human intimacy is one
where people leave each other alone for
the most part and anytime they're asking
questions or trying to get closer to the
core of you it's because you are in
trouble you might actually see a healthy
secure person asking you questions about
yourself or trying to offer you feedback
on something as then criticizing you
because in your mind you're only model
for being seen is when you are being
criticized so you may falsely attribute
any attempts at someone trying to get
closer to you as someone trying to kind
of find out that you are imperfect and
punish you for it in some way and so now
because you're going through life
without that experience of being deeply
seen and known and loved and supported
for who you are on a deep level you
might feel chronically deeply lonely but
not have any conscious awareness of the
fact that that is what you are feeling
because again nobody sat you down as a
child and said hey what you're
experiencing is emotional neglect it's
actually not love and Intimacy in the
way that other people experience love
and intimacy so you might be walking
around your life having all these kind
of surface level relationships that you
keep at arms length thinking to yourself
I'm having healthy and normal
relationships well your body is clocking
constantly the lack of intimacy and
support that you need to stay healthy as
a human so you might feel low-level
feelings of depression of a lack of
satisfaction in your life of anxiety and
not have any idea where those feelings
are coming from because you have
internalized something that is not
normal which is to live your life in
isolation when it comes to intimacy as
normal so if you have an adverse
reaction to that loneliness you're not
going to clock it as loneliness you're
going to clock your strong emotional
response as abnormal or something just
being wrong with you and you might have
a lot of self braiding thoughts around
why can't I just be happy with what I
have I have such a good life not
understanding that you're missing a
vital nutrient so these are a couple of
examples of blind spots that we might
develop that essentially predispose us
to not being capable of meeting the
problems of Our Lives head on if I'm
trying to confront the problem of having
an intimate relationship which is a very
important life event with my total blind
spot around what an intimate
relationship looks like I'm going to
really struggle to meet that challenge
head on because I don't have the skills
I need to confront it directly the same
is true if the challenge that I'm facing
is let's say navigating the workplace
but I grow up in that household where I
see verbal attacks as normal if I I have
a boss that is really domineering and
difficult to work with I'm probably not
going to clock it as a problem the way
people who grew up in a healthier
household would and so I might stay at
that job for a much longer period of
time and I might feel a lot of the
consequences I might grow steadily more
anxious and depressed but not understand
where those feelings are coming from
because I think I'm being treated
normally and so I'm not going to
progress in my career in the same way
because I don't have the skill I need
for staying regulated at work which is
what gives me a clear head to be able to
tackle the problems of my workplace so
essentially these blind spots that we
develop early on in life can impede upon
our ability to tackle the challenges of
life headon and there's many many more
examples than those two that we talked
about that can lead to us struggling to
develop a certain skill set we could
have parents who just have really poor
emotional literacy skills so we could
really struggle to identify What
feelings we're feeling and when and why
and what they're connected to that can
set us up for a really difficult time
facing the challenges of life we might
have shame bound feelings and needs and
I have a whole video that I will link in
the description of this one that goes
over that in detail we might have things
going on in our home environment that
are intentionally obscured from us in a
way that makes it impossible for us to
understand the relationship between
object and subject so an example of this
would be let's say you have have one
parent who is having an affair and the
other parent knows it but you don't know
it and so parent be the parent who is
not having the affair they might be
really struggling with what to do about
this and they might be kind of waffling
on and off do I stay in the marriage do
I leave the marriage and you might clock
that parent's emotional distress but you
can't make sense of it because you don't
know what it's related to but it's very
significant and it indirectly very much
involves you you so your system is
probably going to try to make sense of
it in whatever way you can so you might
think to yourself my parents suddenly
seems way less happy what did I do that
made them unhappy because that's how
children think why is it that some days
they're really angry and some days
they're not what am I doing that might
be making them angry or not and if you
had the real information you could exist
in reality with this problem right you
would know this actually isn't about me
this is about the other parent who's
having an affair and the conversations
that my parents are having around that
that I am unaware of because they happen
when I am not in the room or when I'm
asleep but the emotional environment it
creates inside of the household I am
very much a part of and impacted by but
I don't have the information I would
need to have in order to make sense of
this so I'm going to make the best sense
of it I can based on the information I
have which is incomplete and is likely
to lead me to the wrong conclusion
you could also just be raised by people
who are quite emotionally in congruent
maybe their attachment systems don't
allow them to be directly in touch with
their emotional experience so you might
hear your parents saying that they are
fine or that everything's great when
they are visibly not fine and everything
is obviously not great but you might
start associating a distressed parent
with the feeling of being okay so then
as an adult when someone asks you how
you are if you are in mild to moderate
distress you might consciously think
well that's within the realm of okay I
am okay and then if you're in that range
of mild to moderate distress but you
find yourself really struggling to cope
with it once again you're going to come
back to that assumption that I am crazy
I have irrational emotions and something
is wrong with me because you don't have
the emotional vocabulary to accurately
understand what you're feeling and to
what extent and this is where we enter
into that neurotic territory when we are
not conscious of what causes us to
stress those things that cause us
distress go right on causing us distress
if we don't know that being insulted or
being projected onto is distressing we
are still going to experience distress
in our body when we are projected onto
or when we are insulted if we don't know
that part of intimacy is giving and
receiving feedback in a supportive way
we we are still going to Crave intimacy
and we are going to reject it
consciously when opportunities for
developing it come along because we're
going to misidentify it so we are still
going to feel all of the pain of having
the problems that we don't know we are
having and we are going to need to find
a way to self-regulate without knowing
the true cause of our bad feelings so
now we're going to be trying to
self-regulate in a way that is going to
be extremely hit or
but when we hit it's going to be very
tempting to grab whatever it was that
helped us in that one instance and
become very fixated on it so I kind of
liken this to the experience of having
some sort of illness and you don't know
what the illness is but you know that
you chronically feel unwell and let's
say you find a medication that works
about 70 to 80% of the time and it
doesn't work the other 20 to 30% of the
time but you have no alter alternative
of course you're going to take that
medication you are probably going to
take that medication religiously every
single day and you're not going to
forget to take it because when you don't
take it there is a 100% chance that the
pain is going to come back or a near
100% chance and why would you not at
least reduce your chances to 20 to 30%
that just makes sense so when we are in
emotional or psychological pain but we
don't know why and we find something in
our environment that temporarily soothes
the pain 70 to 80% of the time or in
some cases 20 to 30% of the time
whatever it is we keep doing that thing
because it is very hard to live with
chronic psychological pain so if I am in
overwhelming pain in some area of my
life but I don't know why or where that
pain is coming from because it has gone
underground or it is coming out of an
area that's a blind spot for me but I
find that getting drunk or ordering
pizza or spending money or disappearing
into a fantasy world where my life is
completely different Works to soothe my
feelings of distress most of the time I
am probably going to start doing those
things chronically it just makes sense
because the better regulated we are the
more we are able to meet the demands of
our lives so anything we can find that
helps us self-regulate in the absence of
understanding where our pain is actually
coming from we are going to grasp on and
we are going to use unless and until the
medicine starts causing side effects so
let's say we develop a habit of
chronically overeating because we are
chronically in unhealthy relationships
that we don't recognize as unhealthy and
the real problem is that we have again
that chronic need for Comfort but we
don't recognize it as such we just know
when I eat pizza or chips or drink
alcohol I feel good and the rest of the
time I don't feel so good and I don't
know why so this might kind of work for
us until it doesn't until maybe we stop
liking the way that our body looks or
feels as a result of all of the excess
calories that we're consuming and then
we might only be conscious of the
problem of not liking our body so we
might kind of chronically be at war with
our body where we get caught in these
cycles of yo-yo dieting of gaining
weight and then losing weight and then
exercising and then going back to
emotionally eating because we aren't
aare Ware of the fact that our habit of
emotional eating is not a character flaw
it's not just something that's wrong
with us it is the solution to the
underlying emotional disregulation that
we are
experiencing and until we start dealing
with that underlying emotional
disregulation figuring out what it's
connected to in our external environment
and dealing with that problem directly
we are going to forever be in this back
and forth war with our coping mechanism
because we're not seeing it as a coping
mechanism so we don't understand why we
can't seem to stop doing it maybe it
feels inexplicable and compulsive that
is a neurotic pattern of thinking and
behaving or let's think about that other
example if we never really learn what
deep intimacy feels like our bodies
still register the loneliness of not
having deep Intimacy in our lives even
if we have other relationship ship that
we think are perfectly healthy so maybe
you go on to get married to someone who
is also a victim of early emotional
neglect and who also thinks that having
a very surface level relationship where
you're not deeply seen or known or
understood is what intimacy is and so
now you're in this relationship that you
think is perfectly happy but for
whatever reason you start developing
compulsive obsessive romantic thoughts
and Fantasies about your coworker or
someone else in your life and maybe you
cannot figure out where this sense of
liance is coming from why is it that
even though you're in a perfectly
healthy and happy relationship as far as
you're concerned or if you're single but
otherwise happy with your life you just
cannot drop these obsessive fantasies it
might be because those fantasies are
soothing that deep ache that your body
feels because your body
knows that it needs intimacy and deep
connection and to be seen and known for
the whole of who you are but again your
system might register anyone trying to
get to know you in a deep way as someone
attacking you or trying to discover the
ways in which you're not perfect and
that might give way to these very
obsessive thoughts about other people
because in those fantasies maybe you are
actually getting your intimacy needs
fulfilled so often when we're in liance
we're imagining a scenario where someone
just kind of magically knows sees
understands and gets us without seeing
any of the bad shameful difficult parts
of us and so it kind of bypasses the
work that would need to happen in real
life for us to get that type of intimacy
which is we would need to have conflict
we would need to show the less
flattering parts of ourselves to someone
else we would need to get comfortable
giving and receiving feedback with
someone who we're close to but in our
fantasy world we don't have to do any of
that we can just imagine ourselves
having deep intimacy without needing to
do any of that other stuff that we have
internalized as fatal to relationships
when in reality it's the stuff that
builds deep intimacy so we're just going
to feel like for no reason we are having
these crazy fantasies and thoughts about
someone else despite the fact that we
are perfectly happy with our
relationship status as it is and we
might become highly aware of the fact
that these thoughts about our coworker
or that other person who we're fixated
on are at risk of destroying our
marriage or our life and so we might see
those thought patterns as the problem
and go to war against those thought
patterns when in reality that neurotic
thought pattern is in some deep way a
gift and that's what we're going to
spend the rest of this video talking
about the fact that our neurotic
patterns of Behaving and thinking are
also a deep and important insight into
the parts of ourselves that we have
repressed and those repressed parts of
ourselves are what we need to get in
touch with and integrate consciously in
order to feel whole as people so one of
my absolute favorite young quotes on
this topic goes we do not cure our
Neurosis our Neurosis cure us so when we
switch our frame of thinking from this
neurotic thought pattern or this
compulsive behavior is ruining my life
to this compulsive thought pattern or
behavior is giving me incredibly
important information about what I need
in order to feel whole we can start
working with those Neurosis instead of
against them and from personal
experience I can confidently say that I
would never have begun in attachment
healing journey in the first place if it
had not been for my neurotic patterns of
thinking and behaving starting to take
over my life so I grew up fearful
avoidant and I aired avoidant enough
that I didn't really care enough about
my relationships failing left right and
Center to pursue attachment healing for
the sake of having healthier
relationships I started pursuing
attachment healing because my substance
and food abuse issues were getting so
intense that I felt like I was going to
spend the rest rest of my life locked in
a battle against my own Neurosis if I
didn't start getting at the underlying
root of them and I started reading books
that connected neurotic patterns of
thinking feeling behaving eating
drinking to underlying unmet needs one
of those needs being the need for deep
connection with other people which led
me to the realm of attachment work and
had those parts of myself that knew what
I needed not been kept alive in some way
through those neurotic patterns of
thinking and behaving that started
disrupting my life so heavily I couldn't
ignore them anymore I would never have
done the Deep work that was required to
actually learn skills for
self-regulating and connecting with
other people which ultimately led me to
a place where I felt like my life had
really deep meaning in a way that I
didn't even know was possible
so I want to encourage us to stop hating
on our neurotic patterns of thinking and
behaving and start welcoming them as
Messengers for parts of ourselves that
we once had to Exile or cut off that we
now might be able to actually integrate
in a way that makes our lives better so
we're going to talk now about what it
looks like to use our neurotic patterns
of thinking and behaving and feeling as
keys to the unconscious so something
that Freud once said about Neurosis is
that it is the inability to tolerate
ambiguity if you have no idea what is
causing your bad feelings it's natural
to feel a sense of anxiety when they
come up but a key part of
self-regulation involves being able to
coach ourselves through ambiguity
without becoming anxious to the point of
overwhelm and needing to reach for the
first possible solution to our pain
and the nice thing is that the better we
get at understanding our pain the less
anxiety we are going to feel in response
to it because we understand which
principles are governing it so we know
that it's not going to last forever but
in order to get to that place
paradoxically the exact skill we need to
start developing is the skill of
existing inside of
ambiguity when we are children we don't
understand anything we are born into
this world and everything about cause
and effect is one giant mystery to us
and ideally what happens is we have
parents who can show us the world in a
way that makes sense and who can help us
connect the way we feel internally to
the world outside of ourselves and
because in that secure environment we
learn to internalize that a bit of
anxiety is often followed up by
discovery that helps us to make
meaningful sense of the world we don't
panic when that tinge of anxiety arrives
we don't have anxiety about our own
anxiety we can sit in a place of
ambiguity for a bit of time until we
figure out what is going on because
again we can rest assured that we will
arrive at an understanding of what's
going on and why we're feeling the way
that we're feeling if you did not have
that secure caregiving environment as a
child you unfortunately need to
cultivate it for yourself as an adult so
this means teaching yourself the skills
for getting comfortable with uncertainty
and ambiguity and this is something I
have a whole video on around
self-containment specifically which is
linked in the description of this video
but for now we're just going to talk
about how to move away from a sequence
of events that looks like have a feeling
that you find distressing then panic and
then because you're panicking reach for
the first possible explanation you can
think of around why you might be feeling
this feeling that you don't understand
and then TR to solve the problem based
on the story you made up around it which
inevitably if you did not have the
proper diagnosis does not make the
problem go away permanently so then in
the future the feeling comes back up and
then you go right back into that Loop of
panicking again we have to start nipping
all of this in the bud by when that
feeling that you don't understand comes
up learning to tolerate the ambiguity of
not yet understanding it so we're going
to go into a multi-step step process
around how you can get better at this
step one in this process is just
learning to notice our feelings in the
first place and it's okay if we have to
work backwards through our thoughts to
get to our feelings which is actually
often the case for those of us who a a
little bit more neurotic so an example
of this would be there was a period of
time I went through where I noticed that
I was having a lot of self-hating
thoughts and generally I'm someone who
is pretty nice to myself and so that
kind of struck me as odd I remember
going why is it that lately from the
time I wake up in the morning till the
time I go to bed at night it's like I'm
looking at myself and my life under a
microscope and only analyzing the things
that I absolutely hate about myself or
about my life or that I think I am doing
wrong it's like this inner critic is
suddenly very online and I was very
conscious of those thoughts I was aware
that I was troubled by them
but I wasn't really identifying the
feeling underneath those thoughts and so
I sat with it one day and went what is
the feeling underneath these critical
thoughts and I went the feeling is hate
I have rage and anger and actually
blinding hatred that I'm directing
towards myself right now and I don't
know why I didn't recently make any big
mistake that I'm mad at myself for but
for whatever reason I am feeling hate
very intensely and that is step one when
you have a neurotic thought pattern or a
neurotic feeling or something that
you're getting obsessed with or fixated
on can you stop and just figure out what
the feeling that you're feeling is not
attaching it to a story not trying to
figure out why you're feeling that just
literally identifying the feeling in one
word hate anger anxiety
sadness whatever it is disgust fear
Panic just recognizing the feeling
that's it that's step one isolating the
feeling itself from the story that you
have around the feeling so my story
might be I'm not working hard enough I
don't look good enough whatever it is
but the feeling is hate that's all I
need step two is to consciously identify
it as a neurotic feeling what this does
not mean is telling yourself that you're
crazy so I don't want to go telling
myself I am insane for feeling hatred
because there's no reason for me to be
feeling hatred what I'm actually going
to be doing here is the opposite of that
I'm going to be telling myself I feel
hatred and I don't know why I don't have
a satisfactory logical explanation for
why I feel this chronic overwhelming
hatred towards myself it's not really
resolving when I'm trying to improve
myself the self-hate hatred persists or
it changes form and just comes back in
another area so it really seems like
maybe I'm not making the right object
relation between my internal State and
my external world if I were the hate
would be getting resolved through my
actions but it's not so I might be
making the wrong object relation which
qualifies it as a neurotic feeling but
the feeling itself is real that part is
very important so I'm going to keep
repeating it
step three is to deny ourselves the
meaning making process temporarily so
putting it on hold so deliberately
telling ourselves I am actually not
allowed to try to figure out why I am
feeling so much hate right now I am not
allowed to make any story or any
assumptions about this until I do step
four which is just being present with
the emotion itself and getting to know
it getting familiar with it what does
the hate feel like in my body where does
it show up can I point at the area of my
body where I feel it the most strongly
how often am I feeling it when did it
start what other feelings get triggered
when I start feeling this feeling so all
we're doing here is getting really
familiar with the raw
sensation of the feeling not the story
we have around it but what it is like to
experience that feeling in our bodies
and we might even want to draw pictures
about what it's like this is a tactic I
tend to use when I'm struggling to not
create stories about something if I were
to sit down and just draw what it feels
like to be experiencing this feeling
what would I draw would I draw an ocean
that I feel like I'm drowning in would I
draw a dark night that I feel like I
can't see through
what is the raw sensation like of this
thing this is the art of teaching
ourselves how to be present with pain
without trying to escape it by
understanding it and resolving it
there's nothing wrong with understanding
and resolving our pain and I want to
make that clear but if we have gotten
used to ascribing our pain to the wrong
things we want to First unlearn learn
the wrong things which requires us to go
to the source of the pain or the
uncomfortable feeling that we're trying
to resol and just get to know it which
is step five just be present with
whatever comes up and allow yourself to
be surprised by the experience of your
own pain or your own Joy or whatever it
is that you have repressed it probably
has qualities that you don't know about
because you've been spending so much
time fixating on whatever is going to
take it away or whatever is going to
distract you from it that you don't
actually know everything that exists
inside of it so in this example that
I've been working with here when I was
feeling all of this hatred I was
eventually able to understand that what
had happened recently was I had been
betrayed in a very significant Way by a
romantic partner and instead of
directing my hate towards that person
because I had a model of the world that
it is not safe to hate other people
especially to hate your attachment
figures I directed all of the hate that
I was feeling towards myself because I
was a safe person for me to hate but
before I knew any of that and when I was
just spending time getting to know that
sensation of hatred which eventually
gave way to pain which gave me a lot of
information about what I was actually
experiencing a lot of other things came
up that really surprised me there was a
sense of Freedom that was inherent to
moving through that pain that I had no
idea would be there there was also very
complicated feelings that I didn't want
to feel I happened into days of just
recognizing that I still had a ton of
sexual feelings towards this person that
I didn't want to have I wanted to be
angry and hateful but I couldn't be
there was things in my system that I
needed to move through in order to
arrive in reality about everything that
I was feeling including things I thought
it made no sense for me to feel and
that's often what happens at this step
we start feeling everything including
the things that we wish we weren't
feeling including the things we feel
ashamed of feeling including the things
that we think we should not be feeling
or we need to monitor oursel around
feeling because if we are used to not
being at choice when it comes to how we
deal with our emotions so if for the
majority of our life we've just been
having feelings and then reacting to
them the only way we might know how to
monitor our behavior is to try to keep
ourselves from feeling certain things in
the first place so if we have this model
that every time I feel attracted to
someone I need to go be with them it
might feel really threatening if someone
who we have decided not to be with or if
someone who has decided to not be with
us is someone we're feeling attraction
for we might feel like I need to shut
down that attraction at all costs
because it's going to cause me to go and
try to be with this person but in this
process what we're learning is just
being present with our feelings and
getting to know them without judgment
and without the need for action and this
skill of being present with feelings
without acting on them is likely a very
new one for you it's a new one for a lot
of us but you can probably already see
how this is starting to put you in the
position of being able to respond with
intentionality to your feelings rather
than simply reacting to them and the
thing about this step is that it moves
us into the next one which is just being
comfortable with living in a slightly
Messier and more ambiguous way for a
while so when we are used to living in a
neurotic way what it means is that we
are avoiding ambiguity like the plague
anytime we have a feeling that we don't
know the cause of we might jump to the
first thing we can jump to to try to
control that feeling or get it to go
away and what we are training ourselves
to do here is the direct opposite of
that it is to live with the question of
what is going on for me and why am I
feeling the things I'm feeling for long
periods of time because the longer we
keep those questions as kind of open
cases in our awareness the better we
become
at understanding the real underlying
causes of our thoughts and our feelings
and our compulsions and our neurotic
habits when we allow our feelings we
have repressed back up into our
conscious awareness for a while it's
going to be hard to make sense of them
we might have no idea why we feel
distressed one morning and then Happy by
midafternoon and then angry in the
evening all of our feelings might start
to feel like giant question marks
because we are not immediately trying to
compartmentalize them and get rid of
them or change them and yet we are still
in the process of learning and educating
ourselves around where they are coming
from and what they are actually
connected to in either our environment
or our past so this is kind of the
process of detaching our emotions from
the things that we used to connect them
to and allowing them to exist in a state
of ambiguity until we get better at
making the real connections
and then we can reattach those feelings
in a more accurate way to their actual
causes so very very slowly we learn to
just be present with our feelings as
they come up get to know them get to
sense into them get to learn the
different qualities of them and then
over time we construct new systems of
meaning that are more accurate and
probably we're going to need help in
this process so we might seek out help
from enlightened Witnesses in the form
of people like therapists or support
workers who can help us make sense of
ourselves because they have the
emotional vocabulary that we are
currently lacking we might need to do a
lot of reading a lot of
self-exploration a lot of talking to
friends or trying out new social
environments to notice what we feel in
different environments and to start
getting attuned to the feeling of yes I
like this this feels like me or no I
don't like this this doesn't feel like
me and through that process we start to
learn our authentic preferences our
authentic wants our authentic needs and
ideally life ends up surprising us a lot
in that process when we are no longer
pushing our emotions away from us and
avoiding situations that bring up
feelings we don't want numbing out from
feelings we don't like obsessively
fixating on things that make us feel
good we're leaving space to actually get
to know ourselves in a holistic way and
often we find out that we have a lot of
traits desires quirks that we didn't
know about and that is ultimately a
pretty cool process and where it leads
us is to that place where we are able to
more readily tolerate reality because
when we are aware of who we are what our
needs are what our values are what our
underlying drives and motivations and
wants are even really intense pain can
be weathered and we can self-regulate
through really challenging
circumstances because we are deeply in
touch with what matters to us which
gives the pain in our life
meaning meaningful pain what Young calls
legitimate suffering is the opposite of
neurosis Neurosis is is when we are
stuck in a pattern of trying to resolve
our pain through a means that cannot
possibly resolve it directly so we are
unknowingly perpetuating that Pain by
wasting all of our time trying to solve
it in the wrong place and the act of
healing from Neurosis is the act of
getting in touch with the full range of
our emotions and learning to solve the
problems of our life at their core so
we're switching over from a life of
illegitimate suffering as young would
put it to a life of legitimate suffering
where even the pain and the challenge
that we encounter is aligned with a
sense of meaning all right I am going to
leave it there for today but we have a
lot more on Neurosis coming up in the
next month and a half specifically
around how our neurotic patterns of
thinking and behaving get in the way of
healthy self-regulation and
co-regulation so those are things we're
going to be discussing at length in the
weeks to come as always leave any
questions thoughts anything you would
love to see covered in the month ahead
in the comment section below I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]