When you do grow up with complex PTSD,
one of the core traits is that you have
learned
helplessness. Because when you were a
child, you may have been truly powerless
over the circumstances that you were in.
You may have learned that there's no way
to change your circumstances. air go. If
you want to have a different feeling
other than the feelings of frustration,
anger, hopelessness, whatever it is that
are a product of your environment, you
have to learn how to dissociate into a
fantasy world where everything is
perfect and nothing hurts. And when we
learn to regulate ourselves that way, we
can develop a huge blind spot around the
fact that things like hope and happiness
and love can be found in the world
outside of us, not just in the world
that exists inside of our minds and
imaginations.