hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel
we're going to be talking about the
construct of complex
PTSD and why it can make it difficult to
advocate for yourself inside of personal
relationships now this is likely to
apply to anybody who struggles not just
with complex PTSD but any sort of early
relational wounding that makes it
difficult to parse apart what's my role
inside of a relationship which of my
needs am I responsible for fulfilling
versus which of my needs are
interpersonal ones and how do I make the
negotiations that are necessary to keep
my relationships healthy while making
sure that everybody's needs are
fulfilled so what we're going to go over
today is why having complex PTSD or
toxic shame or attachment wounding makes
it so difficult to identify what our
interpersonal needs are as well as how
we can start moving towards a better
understanding of what we need and how to
communicate it with the people who are
close to us so to start off we're going
to talk about how this problem develops
specifically through the lens of those
of us who have early relational wounding
that lead us susceptible to having a lot
of toxic shame so we start out as
children cleanly expressing our needs
this is something that comes natural to
all of us when we are very young our
only possible chance at survival when we
are babies is expressing our needs to
our caregivers and hoping that they are
both competent enough and compassionate
enough to respond to them sensitively
unfortunately what often happens if you
have cptsd or other forms of early
developmental wounding is that instead
of getting that sensitive attuned
response when you express a need you get
a Mis attuned response so what this
means is that you are trying to express
something you need and your caregiver is
either not understanding what you need
so they are giving you the wrong
response or they are ignoring or
rejecting your need particularly if your
needs are emotional and your caregiver
has some sort of Shame around responding
to emotional needs that they have
internalized hence when you express them
they're unable to respond sensitively
what this can also lead to and this is
something we've talked about at length
in other videos which I will link in the
description of this one is having your
emotions become shame bound so now
whenever you start feeling whatever
emotion it is that your caregiver
generally responds negatively to you
start to process that both in your mind
and your automatic body as this emotion
is wrong I ought not to express it but I
also ought not feel it so let's say
every time you experience distress and
you show it to your caregiver they tell
you you're being pathetic or you need to
suck it up or something of the like you
might start to believe okay that feeling
is just crazy and irrational it does not
have a basis in reality airo in order to
make sure it doesn't get in the way in
other areas of my life my best possible
shot is learning to repress this need
and if it makes it into my conscious
awareness to remind myself this is crazy
and irrational and I ought not to
express it now this leads to two
problems one is that you get really good
at emotional inhibition so anytime
you're experiencing a strong feeling
that once led to rejection by the people
closest to you you learn to keep that
feeling inside and not say it to the
people around you so you may have
learned not to express anger and sadness
but you may also have learned not to
express too much joy or too much
attraction or too much excitement
because maybe those things as well as
the more stereotypical negative emotions
are the ones that you got shamed for at
some point in your life so now you're
walking around with all of these
feelings that are providing you with
real important pieces of information but
you've learned to tell yourself these
feelings are crazy and I need to make
sure that nobody else is aware that I
have them lest I get rejected again but
also you may have developed a specific
type of paranoia that I've noticed is
very common among people with complex
PTSD which is the feeling that other
people can kind of read your mind and
tell what you are feeling and anytime
you're feeling something super strongly
now this is not a paranoid delusion
right so it's not that you necessarily
truly believe people can read your mind
but it's more this feeling of almost
feeling naked anytime a really strong
feeling arises for you and having this
fear like oh my God other people can
tell that I'm feeling this thing and the
reason you feel this paranoia and this
intense desire to make sure that your
feelings are kept clamped down where no
one can see or hear them is because in
your early life you likely had a larger
than average cost of mistake when it
came to expressing feelings that would
disregulated your caregivers so if every
time you showed even a little bit of
anger you would get met with a really
extreme response from a caregiver you're
going to now be extremely hypervigilant
about monitoring your own thinking in
your own feeling for any sign of anger
and you're going to be working overtime
to make sure that you're not expressing
it at all as opposed to let's say
someone who is raised in a more secure
environment who doesn't have significant
shame binds around their emotions
they're going to feel anger and maybe
have a little bit of a conscious process
around how do I express this healthfully
how do I not let it get in the way in
some major way in my relationship but
there's not going to be this
overwhelming fear that letting even a
little bit of it leak out is going to
lead to an extreme response when you
have complex PTSD it's often the
opposite so any emotion that was shame
bound early on for you may have gotten
that way because it once led to a very
extreme response from your environment
that you were completely and totally IL
equipped to handle at that time so now
if you feel even a tinge of anger a
tinge of sadness a tinge of lust a tinge
of excitement or joy you might become
hypervigilant to make sure that those
things are not at any cost showing to
the people around you because again
you're used to that very high cost of
mistake making one small slip up in your
emotional regulation could lead to a
really explosive or traumatizing
response now this leads to its own very
specific problem which is that when we
have that hypervigilant response to our
own emotional state so we're really
carefully monitoring how we're thinking
and feeling to make sure that none of it
is leaking out of us what often happens
is we are over estimating how much other
people are picking up on our emotional
cues so I might be walking around
thinking anytime I feel attraction or
excitement or anger everybody can tell
it's written all over my face when in
reality I am displaying almost nothing
and it's very very hard in fact to read
me because that emotional repression
skill has been so cleanly honed but the
problem with having that hypervigilance
around not expressing our emotions
paired with that kind of subconscious
belief that other people are always
picking up on these little tiny things
that we're feeling can lead to an
experience of resentment in
relationships because we may feel like
okay my emotional volume is so loud
inside my own head there's no way that
other people aren't picking up on it a
little bit and then we can start to
subconsciously punish other people for
not responding to the emotions that we
believe they are seeing in us when in
reality they may not be able able to
read us at all we may seem like a
totally closed book and they might have
no clue what our needs are and so this
leads to a vastly different experience
of ourselves than other people are
having we see ourselves as these very
emotional very intense people whereas
other people may have absolutely no idea
how to read us or what's going on with
us and this might lead to a ton of
resentment and a ton of anger inside of
our relationships when we feel like I am
showing you how I feel 24 hours a day
not realizing that other people actually
have no clue what we're thinking or
feeling or needing from them so just to
recap all of that really quickly if you
grow up in an environment where you
showing specific emotions leads to a
Cascade of extreme responses from your
environment what you're likely to do is
learn to inhibit your emotions while
becoming hypervigilant to the times when
they show up inside of your body and
mind because of that hyper vigilance it
might feel as though other people are as
aware of what you're feeling as you are
when in reality you are severely
instinctually inhibiting your emotional
expression and other people actually
have next to no clue what is going on
for you so you might be walking around
feeling frustrated that nobody is
attending to your emotional experience
or nobody seems to care about all of the
intense things that you're feeling when
in reality you have not learned the
skill SKS for showing what you're
feeling because it was once not safe for
you to do so so to start reversing this
cycle what we need to do is a learn to
recognize when we are in a safe
environment for emotional expression so
what we're going to talk about for the
rest of this video might not be a safe
thing to do if you are still living in
the environment that you develop these
responses within however if you are now
living independently you have a Social
Circle or one or two people who you can
practice ice this with you can learn to
start undoing some of that patterning
and getting into the more secure
response pattern which brings us to the
heart of this video which is learning
self- advocacy in
relationships so when I think about
self- advocacy two things come to mind
immediately one is internal self-
advocacy so being willing to justify and
validate our own feelings and needs as
real responses to our environment not
crazy garbage that we made up inside of
our mind and then external self-
advocacy which is doing the work of
educating other people about what our
feelings and needs are as well as what
we might need from them in order to feel
like our interpersonal needs are being
met now this requires a high degree of
self-awareness and emotional sobriety
and those skills in and of themselves
can take a while to develop but what
we're going to do today is just go over
a blueprint of what it looks like to be
able to practice the skill of self-
advocacy the the same way that someone
who is raised securely attached
naturally does quite frequently inside
of their Intimate Relationships so what
we're going to do is look kind of side
to side at what a secure person
processing their emotional needs looks
like versus what someone with complex
PTSD or early wounding might look like
when they're processing their needs so
let's say that this circle represents a
secure person's emotional and practical
needs so this is everything that they
currently do not have that they need in
order to feel relatively stable and
balanced secure people are not without
problems life is constantly throwing
curveballs and there are constantly
things that are needing to be attended
to but the secure person also tends to
have a fairly High awareness of what
their needs are so they're able to
identify why they're feeling out of
whack or what they're stressed out about
or why they're emotionally disregulated
most of the time not all of the time but
most of the time and that's a
combination of them having good
emotional literacy skills so being able
to accurately name and define what's
wrong for them when something's going on
but also the result of them having
strong interpersonal skills so there's
likely quite a few people they can go to
for co-regulation or to bounce their
problems off of who are able to give
them good perspective on what it is that
they need that they might be missing now
contrast this to a person with complex
PTSD
it's likely that that Circle of what
your needs are is much much bigger than
that of the secure persons and the
reason for that is because having
complex trauma by definition means that
you've experienced a great deal of early
wounding that has led to a great deal of
problems that are both practical and
emotional in nature so you are highly
likely at any given point in time to be
dealing with a surplus of practical
challenges and a surplus of emotional
challenges because with those practical
challenges comes emotional disregulation
which is the same for a secure person
however the secure person has access to
resources both internally and externally
that help them regulate around those
challenges you are less likely to have
those same resources if you have complex
PTSD so now when you have practical
problems you're likely to also become
highly emotionally disregulated not
necessarily have the resources to
re-regulate yourself and so you're less
able to deal with those practical
problems and solve them which leads to
more emotional disregulation and so that
Circle just keeps getting bigger and
bigger so once again at any given point
in time the true legitimate needs of
someone with complex PTSD are likely to
be significantly more than the average
secure person now what's tricky is that
your awareness of what your needs are is
much smaller than the average secure
persons often because there's been that
experience of early gaslighting or early
trauma or early shame binding that has
made a lot of what you need inaccessible
to you consciously so you might blame a
lot of your problems on you just being a
terrible no good person when in reality
you are facing very real very legitimate
problems that a secure person would also
feel distressed by but they would know
that they could seek help in solving
those problems having toxic shame often
means that you fail to give your
problems legitimacy you chalk them up to
you being a terrible person and you
assume that much of what you're dealing
with you don't deserve help around so
your awareness of what your literal
needs are is much smaller both
proportion Al and literally than the
secure persons and I find that a lot of
the time people with complex PTSD severe
attachment wounding whatever it is will
actually get frustrated when they see
secure people asking for help or needing
support in the areas that they believe
they are unable or should not be asking
for help or seeking support in because
there's this internalized worldview that
you can only ask for help or you can
only feel sorry for yourself or give
yourself any type of compassion
if your situation is so extreme that it
would debilitate absolutely anybody so
watching other people exist in the
middle of that spectrum and ask for help
and seek Community Support in areas that
are not necessarily in crisis mode yet
can actually be highly triggering for
you and you might feel contempt or
defensiveness when you see it happening
which leads us to the last Factor here
which is what you feel comfortable
asking for help or support with and when
I say comfortable asking for help and
support I look at that as kind of a
three-part equation part one is feeling
like support or help is available to you
like it's something that it's even
possible to ask for part two is knowing
how to ask for help so having the skill
to communicate your need and ask for
help in its fulfillment and then part
three is giving yourself permission to
do that and this is very often the
hardest part for those who struggle with
shame bound needs and emotions so once
again again when you are securely
attached you're going to have your
literal needs and your awareness of your
needs being fairly matched and then
you're also going to have a pretty big
proportion of those needs being things
that you're comfortable asking for help
with now of course secure people can
struggle with asking for help as well
that's not to say that this is always an
easy thing but in general having the
emotional regulation skills to solve
most of your personal needs intuitively
tends to automatically give secure
people the per permission to reach out
and ask for help and support in the
areas that they've identified they can't
solve on their own and they don't see
that as something that is shameful to do
in fact something that secure people
tend to naturally understand is that
other people actually like offering help
and support because when you live in
healthy interpersonal systems that's how
people stay connected they find ways to
make each other feel useful and
important by exchanging practical and
emotional health so as funny as it may
seem to you if you have a lot of that
early wounding in Secure systems a lot
of the time it's actually considered an
act of kindness to ask someone for help
or support because you're showing them
that you really value what they bring to
your life and also creating a system
where they can now come to you when they
need something for those of us with
complex PTSD or other forms of early
wounding this is a very different story
so we have that large circle of needs
that small circle of needs that we are
consciously aware of and then the circle
of things that we feel comfortable
asking for help for so things that we
believe help is available for that we
know how to ask for and that we have
given ourselves permission to ask for is
almost non-existent it's a very tiny
Circle because if you don't grow up in
that healthy interpersonal system you
don't learn that giving and receiving
help is part of what keeps people in
connection you may have learned
something like asking for help gets me
rejected even further or ask for help
places an incredible burden on other
people and now I'm responsible for
burdening them which might come with an
overwhelming amount of guilt and shame
so much so that even thinking about
making that ask starts to kind of shut
down the system I remember when I was
doing my graduate degree and I was
really really struggling with this one
aspect of one of my courses I just could
not wrap my mind around a certain
project that I was trying to do and I
remember talking to my therapist about
it and and him telling me well why don't
you just ask your professor for some
clarification or for some help and in my
mind that was the worst thing that I
could possibly do that was the quickest
way I believed to get rejected to be
seen as stupid to be outcasted from the
entire academic environment and my
therapist looked at me and went you are
literally paying this school to help you
you are paying them a very not
insignificant amount of money because
you are going there to learn your
professors and Tas and academic advisers
are all staffed and paid money because
they play the role of helping you learn
it is their job to be responsive when
you need help and thinking about it that
way was very very foreign to me but
really illuminated the fact that even in
this position where I was explicitly
paying a ton of tuition to get the
support that I needed in learning I was
so hardwired to believe asking for help
was the absolute worst and most
burdensome thing a person could do it
took me a lot of work to be able to
access the resources that were blatantly
and explicitly available to me and this
is very much not an uncommon occurrence
for people who have complex PTSD whether
it's an academic environment a personal
environment a service you're paying for
your awareness of what you are able to
ask for help with what it is appropriate
to ask for help with and what you need
help with it's likely very small
relative to the average person's and the
vend diagram gets a little wonky here
because it's also possible that there
are some areas of your life where you
feel totally comfortable asking for help
and other areas where you feel like you
would rather die than ask for help so
you might be over asking for help in one
area and under asking for help in
another so let's say you don't mind
going to people to get your emotional
needs met this is going to be not true
at all of some people with cptsd very
true of others but maybe you have no
awareness of the Practical needs that
you have and how you could both help
yourself and get help in fulfilling
those so because you have all of these
practical needs that are going unfilled
or that you're unable to help yourself
with you might have a surplus of
emotional needs that you are now
consistently going to other people with
whereas you would have way way less of
those if you would actually ask for help
in more practical areas or the reverse
could be true maybe you are over relying
on people practically to help you
fulfill your survival needs because you
are constantly so emotionally
disregulated internally and totally
unable to get help with that because you
believe it is completely shameful to ask
for emotional help in any capacity that
you're not able to regulate yourself
enough to solve your survival and
practical needs so this is about
learning to even out the score so that
you're asking for the appropriate level
of help in the appropriate categories so
that the problems in your life are
actually getting solved rather than
continuing to to perpetuate themselves
which brings us to the final portion of
this video how to self- advocate so I'm
going to bring us back to that
definition of self- advocacy as being
able to both internally identify and
validate our needs and feelings as well
as externally advocate for them which
means teaching people what our feelings
and needs are as well as how they can
appropriately respond to them is this a
Magic Bullet that means your
interpersonal needs will always be met
by other people absolutely not this has
to be a consensual encounter right other
people have to be willing to be
responsive to your needs in order for
this to work so this might mean choosing
different relationships or different
people to be in your inner circle if the
people who you're currently close to
don't want to take your feelings and
needs seriously but first let's go
through the steps of making sure that we
are not assuming that of people when in
fact fact there's a lot of money on the
table
interpersonally and what I mean by that
is that we may have people in our Lives
who would be willing to be much more
responsive to and compassionate towards
us than we think because we're making
errors in judgment about how well other
people are able to read us and
understand what our needs are so step
one in that process is figuring out how
to get that vend diagram of our needs to
look more similar to a secure person's
and taking that awareness Circle and
trying to expand it so this is the
process of kind of UNG gaslighting
ourselves of failing to tell ourselves
that our feelings and our needs are
unimportant pathetic and don't deserve
to be attended to until we can believe
truly believe within ourselves that we
are worthwhile human beings who have a
right to be healthy and have our needs
met both practically and emotionally it
is going to be really really hard to
convince anyone else that that is true
in large part because we're not even
going to know what our feelings and
needs are if they are so shame bound and
so hidden from ourselves that we cannot
correctly identify them we're likely
going to be just asking over and over
for things that are not really getting
at the heart of what we need and feeling
a sense of frustration and resentment
because we just don't know how to help
ourselves the first thing that often
needs to happen if you have complex PTSD
is you need to admit to yourself that
you have a much much larger than average
circle of needs so expanding that Circle
of awareness if you have complex trauma
you likely have debilitating toxic shame
shame that gets in the way of many
different areas of your life you likely
have a lot of difficulty regulating your
emotions you likely have a a lot of
practical challenges that other people
have not and do not
experience all of these things make your
experience of Life very
challenging however toxic shame is going
to tell you that you do not have a
challenging life you're just pathetic
and worse at dealing with things than
other people so learning to fight back
against that inner critic and stand
strong in the part of yourself that
knows deep down my experience of life is
not just like everybody else is I do
have very significant challenges that
other people truly do not have to the
extent that I have them and that anybody
experiencing this volume of both
practical and emotional problems would
feel equally as overwhelmed or depressed
or anxious or whatever that is as I
currently feel is going to go a very
long way towards educating yourself
about which of your needs are currently
going unfulfilled so just to validate
some simple ones off the bat having any
emotion become shame bound so any
feeling from anywhere on the spectrum of
emotions that most people regularly
experience like fear Joy attraction
anger sadness anything if any of those
core emotions are ones that you feel as
though you cannot feel or Express
without fear of severe repercussion from
your Environ
that is an extraordinarily disregulated
experience that will follow you through
your entire life until you learn to
integrate that feeling having even one
fully shame bound emotion is going to be
chronically dysregulating and it's
likely to make your life and your
relationships feel significantly more
difficult than the average persons
having a lack of stability in your life
a lack of a stable place to live live
lack of consistent income being either
unable to meet your own basic survival
needs or not having people in your
corner who can help you if those needs
are not fulfilled makes your life much
more difficult than the average persons
now what I'm not saying here is that
having these challenges are a death
sentence to your mental health or your
ability to thrive in the world what I'm
saying is that until we recognize the
magnitude of the challenges that we are
up against in life it's really hard to
tackle them at the magnitude that they
need to be tackled so what might be
helpful in Step One is just educating
yourself as much as humanly possible
about what complex PTSD or attachment
wounding or early trauma is and how it
affects the average adult this is going
to help you give validity to your own
challenges rather than just writing them
off as you being a worthless pile of
garbage it might also help to work with
a trauma informed coach or therapist who
can help give you perspective on the
magnitude of the problems you're dealing
with and who's going to help you learn
to take seriously your own problems and
your own emotional responses to them and
this in itself is an ongoing process for
most of us that takes quite a bit of
time and that is perpetually unfolding
as we continue to live our lives but the
sooner we can get started on it the
sooner we can start moving into that
second step which is properly allocating
which needs are ours to fulfill for
ourselves versus which needs it's more
appropriate to ask for help with and
what likely has to happen here is a ton
of self-work in the areas of
differentiation and enmeshment so
differentiation is the process of
understanding where we end and other
people begin and it's likely if you have
cptsd or early relational wounding this
is a very murky area for you and you may
have a ton of beliefs about how
individuals and relationships function
that are very different from how the
average secure relationship functions so
maybe you've internalized these ideas
around if I do X for someone they
automatically owe me why because maybe
you grew up in an environment where no
one could just stand in front of another
person and go hey I need why can you
help me out with that so you may have a
ton of little implicit contracts in your
own mind that for other people are
totally explicit so this is the process
of rooting out what those expectations
you have of other people are as well as
noticing whether or not those are things
that you tend to make explicit so let's
say I have this belief that everybody is
totally and completely responsible for
regulating and adhering to their own
emotional experiences because maybe as a
child that's what was true for me now
when I have a partner or a close friend
come to me and start telling me about an
emotional experience they're having I
might go into some sort of freeze or
Fawn response and respond to them but
grow resentful of them because in my
mind they're breaking the golden rule of
everybody deals with their own emotional
problems and doesn't put them on other
people in reality maybe that person grew
up in a secure environment and they
believe that telling you about their
problems and asking you for feedback is
actually a sign of respect and a bid for
connection because they're showing you
that they value your input and also that
they trust you with personal information
so you might grow resentful that you
feel like you are chronically having to
respond to this person's emotional needs
while dealing with all of your own
independently when in reality you never
made your expectations explicit you
never checked in on why the other person
is sharing with you and you never let
them know that you expect everybody to
keep their needs to themselves or the
total opposite of this could be true
right so maybe you were never taught
self-regulation and the only way you
know how to stay regulated is to
chronically explain your feelings and
needs to other other people and have
them help you understand yourself and
solve your problems and you might have
this secret contract inside of your head
where you will do all of these favors
for other people and then believe that
they now owe you constant on demand
co-regulation anytime you are feeling
out of whack and you might become really
angry and resentful anytime that other
person is not immediately available to
help you self-regulate when you are
struggling but you may never have
stopped to ask yourself do I have an
explicit agreement from this other
person that they are willing to be there
to co-regulate with me on demand am I
growing resentful because someone is
failing to live up to an obligation that
they never agreed to live up to now I
want to level with us all here and make
it clear that there is of course a
normal and by normal I mean kind of
secure level of interpersonal
co-regulation and Attunement that's
inherent to healthy relationships so the
more secure we get the more we're going
to aim for relationships where people
are available to us relatively
frequently to co-regulate especially our
close Intimates so our partners or good
friends or chosen family members however
secure relationships also mean that
those people are not on call for
attending to our needs 24/7 we also need
to be able to self-regulate enough of
the time that we can at least wait for a
couple hours or a day or two until that
person who we want that co-regulation
from is able to be truly available for
us so at this stage of the process
noticing where our resentments lie is
going to be really important instead of
running away with whatever story we're
telling ourselves that's keeping us
feeling resentful towards another ask
ourselves what is the need that I'm
expecting from this other person right
now and is it reasonable so if I'm
feeling really grumpy one day and I'm
really upset that my partner isn't
immediately there making me feel better
I might want to ask myself is it
actually my partner's job to make me
feel better about every little thing
that happens in my day or is a large
part of that my responsibility that I am
neglecting because maybe I have this in
meshed worldview that people are always
meant to tend to each other's emotional
experiences or is it the opposite am I
really annoyed that my partner or my
close friend is needing something from
me or telling me about the way they're
feeling when in reality that's a very
healthy and normal part of having
relationships is seeking out that
co-regulation from each other and often
figuring all this stuff out requires
some help so we may need to read some
books or go to some workshops or find a
coach or therapist who can help us gain
a more robust understanding of what
secure and balanced relationships look
like so this leads us to the last point
in the process which is explicitly
informing people about what our needs
and desires are from a relationship and
framing them positively so that instead
of this kind of lowgrade frustration
that lacks a solution we're giving
people conrete and actionable items they
can work with to make the relationship
that they have with us run more smoothly
so the questions to ask yourself here
when you feel a sense of gnawing
frustration or resentment or anger that
you might tell yourself you don't
deserve to express is validate that
feeling internally okay whether it's
fair or not something is going on for me
and it's getting in the way of my
ability to feel connected to this other
person so it's real and it's there have
I made this explicit so whatever I'm
expecting of this other person that
they're not fulfilling am I 100% sure
that they know I have that need the only
way to be 100% sure is to tell them very
directly that you expect X Y or Z from
them in every other case there is
absolutely plausible deniability that
they do not know that need exists for
you so we want to make sure when we are
angry frustrated or resentful that we
have made our need clear again this is
going to be harder than average for
someone with complex PTSD to wrap their
minds around because you might have that
bias towards thinking that you are
displaying your needs much more than you
actually are next question to ask
yourself in this process have I made the
solution to this problem explicit so
have I framed it in a positive sense and
by positive I don't mean like throw a
bunch of toxic positivity in there what
I mean is have you internally identified
what needs to happen in order for this
problem to feel resolved and have you
made that clear to the other person so
instead of saying you're really pissing
me off today which might feel like
you're making your feelings and needs
explicit have you said hey when you roll
your eyes at me when I share my my
frustrations with you I feel really
frustrated and dismissed I want to feel
close to you I want to have a good
connected relationship with you and in
order to do that I need to feel like you
care about my feelings I need to feel
like we are taking each other seriously
I'm willing to take you seriously when
you're struggling with things and I want
to be there for you but I also need to
feel the same is true and reverse what
can we do to make this work out and
there may need to be a little bit of a
negotiation that follows that maybe
they're not available all of the time to
listen to every concern you have about
your day but there are certain times
they're able to carve out where they can
feel present and responsive to you
without being resentful which is likely
going to stop the kind of passive
aggressive responses now if you have
cptsd or other developmental wounding
stating what you want can actually feel
like an incredibly vulnerable thing
because there may have been a time in
your life where what you wanted was used
to manipul ulate you and so you may have
learned I have to inhibit and keep
hidden what my true wants and desires
are lest I get taken advantage of this
is a really sad experience to have but
unfortunately in order to connect
healthfully with other people we cannot
keep our wants hidden it will not work
because our wants and desires are the
things that provide healthy nutrients to
the relationship and they give
relationships fuel to keep driving it
forward so if letting someone know how
you feel about them what you want out of
the relationship with them feels very
scary and intense to you this is likely
a skill that you need to start
practicing because otherwise it's going
to be really hard to progress past a
certain point in the relationship
because your partner is not going to
feel valued or cared about and once
again it might feel if you have this
overwhelm of love and appreciation for
them internally like they must just know
that they must be able to read your
thoughts and tell how much you care
about them but if you have learned to
significantly inhibit what you're
feeling it's possible they have
absolutely no clue what is going on for
you internally and might be feeling
quite neglected and quite uncared for
despite the abundance of feelings that
you are holding on to internally so this
brings us to our last and final Point
make sure that you are not only making
your needs and expectations explain
but also that you're making your
appreciation explicit are you internally
and externally showing appreciation and
thanks not only for the times when your
partner got things right and was
properly able and willing to address
your needs but also for the ways in
which they were trying to even if those
attempts fell short positive
reinforcement is incredibly important
for the health of a relationship so you
want to make sure that when you are
advocating for your own own needs to get
met you are not only making clear what
those needs are and how the other person
could help fulfill them but you're also
being really explicit about what you
appreciate that they are doing right and
these two sides of the coin are going to
help your relationships move a lot more
smoothly because now nobody's just
flailing around in the dark hoping that
what they're doing is going to work
you're giving your partner as clear and
explicit directions as you can about
what needs to happen in order for you to
have the safety security and confidence
that you need within your relationship
and you're letting them know when it's
working and the more we can model this
behavior for other people the more it
starts to become a relational Norm where
maybe in the past withholding and
resentment and passive aggressiveness
was once the relational Norm now like
most things we talk about on this
channel these changes are vulnerable
they are risky and they take time time
to implement not only for the other
person to accept but also for you to get
comfortable with we don't become
emotionally literate overnight but every
time we take one step in the direction
of identifying what we need phrasing it
positively allowing the other person the
option to agree or to negotiate around
that need we take one step closer to
having secure explicit relationships
where everybody understands what the
expectations are and so we're each free
to agree to or disagree with whichever
Norms begin to emerge out of that
Dynamic and having those norms and
expectations be explicit is going to
save about 90% of the grief that those
of us who grew up insecurely attached or
with complex trauma might experience
inside of
relationships again if both parties are
willing and able to implement this type
of communication all right that's all
I'm going to say for today on the topic
of complex PTSD and advocating for your
needs inside of a relationship as always
any questions comments thoughts that
have been coming up for you as you go
through this video feel free to leave
them in the comment section I'm always
curious to know what you guys are
thinking I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really
[Music]
soon oh