hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about self-esteem and today in
particular we're talking about complex
PTSD and some of the messages you may
have internalized early on in life that
made it really hard for you to develop
proper self-esteem as you grew up so
essentially when we're looking at any
form of trauma what happens when the
brain is traumatized is that it's not
able to put your experiences in into
proper context so in the case of
something like single instance trauma
which is most often what we think of as
PTSD the brain ends up retaining either
too much information about what may be
relevant to that event so if something
traumatic happened and at the time it
happened you were looking at someone
across the street wearing a red shirt
your brain might internalize red shirts
mean danger and then in the future when
you see a red shirt your body is going
to respond with a trigger or you might
retain not enough information about the
traumatic event so if you go into a
dissociative response it's possible that
you won't be forming memories properly
around what led to that event which
could lead you to underestimating danger
in similar situations in the future so
essentially when it comes to trauma what
we're looking at here is the fact that
trauma disrupts our ability to process
memories properly and to put our
memories into proper context and in the
case of complex PTSD which is what we
call a series of traumatic events that
happen to us usually early on in life at
a time when our brains were still
developing we have entire systems of
meaning we form around incomplete forms
of processing so when we grow up with
cptsd often we grow up with a series of
mental health challenges Neurosis
difficulties in certain areas of our
lives and because we don't have the
ability to make sense of why we're
struggling with all of those things and
because we don't see them as what they
are which is trauma responses we develop
a sense of toxic shame which is this
idea that something I don't understand
is wrong with me or go everything bad
that happens to me in life is my fault
and there's nothing I can do about it
because if I'm being honest I don't
really understand why I am just so
different and bad and flawed relative to
everybody else and so what I want to go
over today is what it would have been
like had you had someone who I almost
want to encourage you to think of as a
spirit guide guiding you through your
early life and helping you understand
and make sense of why you were
developing in a way that was not
necessarily similar or identical to the
people around you and how you could lend
yourself compassion in those areas
instead of ascribing all of them to the
fact that there is something wrong with
you and the reason I want to enourage
encourage you to think of this as more
of a spirit guide than a parent figure
is a because your parent figures may
have been the source of your trauma if
you have complex PTSD but also B because
it's highly likely that even if your
parents were incredibly loving and doing
their absolute best they did not have
the language and context themselves to
help you make sense of your experiences
if they had they would have done it and
you would not have developed the trauma
symptoms that you developed so without
further Ado we're going to get into 10
lessons it may have helped you to
understand in childhood that you can now
retroactively apply to your
understanding of yourself if you grew up
with complex
PTSD first lesson that I wish every
person with cptsd had known in childhood
is that the neurotic behavior and
emotional regulation strategies you
almost definitely developed if you have
complex PTSD are not Character defects
they are trauma
responses so if you have trouble with
things like eating disorders substance
abuse social difficulties obsessive
thought patterns chronically low
self-esteem all of these things and many
other things that you may have been
struggling with are not things that you
chose they are the mind and body's
normal response to a set of abnormal
circumstances so if you were missing
some key element that you needed for
health healthy emotional development
your brain is going to do the best it
can in order to help you self-regulate
and your brain's best attempt at
self-regulation if it doesn't have the
tools to actually contextualize your
emotions and make sense of what you are
feeling and why is going to be to
develop things like really rigid
Behavior patterns addictions anxieties
depression in a lot of cases and all of
those things are going to make it
difficult to do things like give
yourself a sense of stability in Life or
to form healthy attachment relationships
because you simply did not learn enough
of the necessary skills to do those
things in the quote unquote normal way
but none of that was a choice which is
likely what you were led to believe
growing up if you didn't have any
context for why you were doing any of
that you probably learned I am just
doing all of this weird stuff and
behaving in weird ways because I am a
different flawed wrong broken person but
I'm going to say it one more time anyone
who grows up emotionally deprived or in
some other significant way traumatized
who does not receive the proper care and
support that they need to make sense of
that will develop neurotic patterns of
thinking and feeling and behaving as a
result of that trauma this would have
happened to anyone in your shoes it is
not something that you chose so the idea
we're trying to get at here is that the
toxic shame you feel is not as personal
as you might think it is it is the
normal response to the life that you had
not a true reflection of the quality of
your soul second thing you may never
have learned if you have complex PTSD
that the average secure person actually
intuitively knows is that it is almost
impossible to concentrate when you are
disregulated so when you are in a fight
flight freeze or Fawn response your body
is pumping blood to the areas of your
brain that are designed to help you
escape danger and stay alive and those
are not the parts of your brain that
help you to focus deeply on details or
on abstract thinking but focusing on
details and abstract thinking is a lot
of what school is as we grow up it's a
lot of what work entails as adults for
most of us and so a lot of us who grew
up with complex PTSD might be really
really hard on ourselves around the fact
that we struggle so much with focus when
in reality that is a normal response to
being in chronic fight or flight mode
it's not because you just don't have the
grit to get through things that you find
unpleasant it is in large part because
you are chronically triggered the most
beneficial and deeply unexpected part of
doing trauma and attachment healing work
for myself has been watching my
attention span expand and exponentially
so being able to actually stay present
with people and with tasks and to be
able to stick with really complex trains
of thought for longer periods of time
the reason why we get smarter when we
heal our trauma is because our brain is
actually able to context which situation
we are in so it's not chronically
responding to small triggers anymore and
so we're able to take the appropriate
cues from our environment that tell us
I'm I'm safe I'm okay air go it's safe
for the blood to flow to the areas of my
brain that are more important for deep
focus than they are for self- protection
so if you had something like a spirit
guide or a really wise Elder who was
with you in your childhood something I
feel pretty sure they would have told
you is that the fact that you have so
much trouble focusing is not because
there's something wrong with you it's
because you are emotionally disregulated
most of the time and the most secure
person in the world faced with that
degree of emotional disregulation
without a reprieve from it or a way to
understand it and how to work with it
would also have every bit as much
trouble concentrating as you do and this
is something that as we do trauma work
we can start to heal from but the first
step in that process of healing from it
is simply acknowledging that there is a
reason it's happening and it's not a
moral failing third thing you may not
have internalized if you have complex
PTSD but that it's incredibly important
to understand is that people need the
most help care empathy and support when
they are struggling the most so when we
have toxic shame there's a very quick
calculation our brain tends to do when
we mess something up make a mistake or
get something wrong and it goes now is
the time to double down on
self-criticism the reason the brain
thinks time to double down on
self-criticism after you have made a
mistake is because you probably had a
very high cost of mistake early on in
life so getting something wrong led to
very severe consequences and when that's
the learning model that the brain
develops around your brain starts
prioritizing not getting things wrong
above trying to get things right so your
brain essentially becomes an inhibition
machine much more than a learning
exploring and grow growing machine which
is what a healthy child is supposed to
be doing their parents or their
caregivers are meant to hold them in
healthy environments where they feel
safe enough to try make mistakes get
things wrong and then receive love and
mentorship when they get things wrong so
when they mess up when they are acting
out when they are not behaving a healthy
caregiving environment recognizes this
is a child who needs a little bit extra
care and support a child who gets that
care and support when they're struggling
early on in life also learns as an adult
when I am struggling when I am making a
higher than average amount of mistakes
that's an indication that I need a
little bit of extra love care and
support from myself right now or from
the people around me and so instead of
going inward into that critical parent
celf and doubling down on self-hatred
they tend to turn outward to their
friends and loved ones who can give them
a little bit of extra support and
guidance or towards their loving inner
parent who can help them understand and
make sense of the mistakes that they
made so that they're actually able to
learn from their mistakes instead of
just keep them super present in their
awareness to avoid making the same one
again in the future a little anecdote
that I really like in this department is
I remember seeing some sort of Facebook
post I think about 5 to 10 years ago
where they were talking about how
there's this somewhere in the world
where anytime someone messes up or hurts
someone else that person gets put in the
center of a circle and all of the other
villagers surround them and remind that
person in the center of all of their
strengths and all of the things that are
good about them and that's something
that I really want you to imagine and
try to keep alive inside of your
imagination the next time you make a
mistake if you're someone with complex
PTSD what would it be like like right
now to put myself in the center of all
of my most loving and compassionate
parts and remind myself of all of the
things I'm doing right and all of my own
strengths because this is the kind of
thing that is actually going to help you
get in reality and start learning from
your mistakes and taking more chances
instead of just doubling down and
inhibiting based on a fear of
Retribution which blends pretty
naturally into the fourth thing that if
you had comp PTSD growing up you
probably did not internalize but it
would have been wonderful if you had
which is that it is normal to not know
things that you have never been taught
and it is also normal to not know things
that you have been taught but that you
were dissociated while they were taught
to you because if you are in a state of
low or high-grade dissociation You Are
by definition not forming memories
properly and a lot of people with
complex PTSD spent a great deal of their
early years intermittently dissociated
and then we can develop all of these
areas of deep shame where there are
basic life lessons that other people
learned really early on and that we know
we were technically taught as well but
that for whatever reason we can't seem
to remember well enough or keep our
focus on those areas and so we feel
embarrassed as adults about all of these
kind of knowledge and skill gaps that we
might have but it is a perfectly normal
thing to not be able to remember and
internalize information that our whole
selves were not online for during the
learning process because the learning
process requires us to be both
emotionally and intellectually present
and the thing is when we grow up with so
many of these knowledge and skill gaps
we often start to internalize a deep
sense of Shame around everything that we
don't know and we often don't even stop
to check in and go have I ever learned
this thing maybe I'm at a new job and my
supervisor is explaining the rules to me
and they might actually be expecting me
to stop them and ask questions around
what I don't understand but if I have
this deep internalized shame that I
should just already know everything
regardless of whether or not I've been
taught it I'm probably not going to stop
and ask questions as they come up I'm
just going to notice what I don't
understand and then go into a shame
spiral about it because that's what my
brain naturally learned to do again to
avoid making the potential mistakes of
asking for clarification on something
and then let's say months later our
supervisor realizes that we did not in
fact understand everything they were
saying they might be really confused and
go I don't understand why you didn't
just stop and ask me questions about
what you didn't know but for the person
with complex PTSD the idea that you
don't know something because you're so
used to having those experiences of
skill and knowledge gaps is so shame
inducing that you might not even be
stopping in your day-to-day daylight to
sort out what do I not know because I
was dissociated when learning it early
on in life which is where you might have
that shame naturally arise versus what
do I not know because I actually have
never been taught it full stop in a
dissociated or Associated State and in
either case it's really beneficial to
give ourselves compassion but it's also
important to note that sometimes we are
assuming we ought to know things that
there is no way we could possibly know
we cannot know anything we have not been
taught so it's not inherently shameful
to have a knowledge Gap and it's also
not shameful to have knowledge gaps
around things we were dissociated when
learning but this is an awareness you
likely have to wait into very slowly as
you heal from complex PTSD and learn
that you now exist within a world where
it's safer than it once was to not know
fifth lesson you may not have learned
growing up if you grew up with complex
PTSD is that in order for life to feel
meaningful you have to get to know
yourself and figure out what your unique
wants interests and passions are and
then you have to align your life with
those things when you grow up with
complex BTSD one of the top things you
internalize is that you cannot trust
your feelings your feelings if you
express them fully are likely to lead to
significant repercussions and so you
probably instead learn some version of
I'm going to look around me check on
what everybody else is doing and then
try to copy what other people are doing
without stopping to check in see how I'm
feeling and what I want to do and then
build my actions around that and while
that strategy does often help us avoid
significant consequences or punishments
it also does not allow us to figure out
what is going to make our life feel
deeply satisfying so if you feel like
your life is perpetually kind of empty
and even things that make other people
really happy don't seem to do it for you
it's probably not because you're broken
or just have something inherently wrong
with you it's probably because there was
a lot of shame in the way of you truly
Getting to Know Yourself growing up and
so you weren't able to make decisions
from a meaningful place and I do have a
video on emotional neglect that I've
Linked In the description of this video
that's going to go over some signs that
this might be the thing you're
struggling with as as well as how to
start getting back in touch with
yourself but the idea here is that one
of the things you might be missing major
context on if you grew up with complex
PTSD is yourself and who you are and
what matters to you and all of those
things are what goes into building a
life that feels meaningful sixth thing
you may not have learned if you grew up
with complex PTSD is that your triggers
are not your core authentic self so when
I think of someone with toxic shame or
complex PTSD I kind of think of the
self-concept as three- layered so on the
top layer there is the mask or the fake
self that you learn to present to the
world in order to get by in life and
underneath that mask there's this layer
of trauma triggers so things like your
neurotic or obsessive patterns of
thinking and behaving or your emotional
disregulation or your challenges with
forming and maintaining healthy intimate
relationships and you might think if you
have conf PTSD that that second layer is
your core authentic self so when you
hear other people say just be yourself
just let other people get to know you
you think no no no you don't understand
my core authentic self is a bad broken
person if other people got to know that
person they would hate me but in reality
there's a layer that exists beneath that
layer and what exists beneath that layer
is the raw core of you so the part of
you that just feels things very clearly
and cleanly and directly the you who is
able to think and sense make around
those things in a clear way and often
that version of you is the version of
you that you spend the least time with
because Layer Two involves so much shame
for you and tells you the story that
whatever is beneath here is definitely
going to be completely wrong and once
again I have a video that goes over this
in more detail called toxic shame how it
leads to Chronic disregulation it is
linked to in the description of this one
but the idea is that you mistake your
traumatic responses for your core self
those things are not the same thing and
the beautiful thing about this is that
the more we gain an awareness of who our
true selves are and of the fact that
there is absolutely nothing wrong with
us in our raw authentic state that place
becomes the solid ground that we can
start standing on in order to gain the
strength and perspective to start
working with our trauma triggers and our
neurosis and our toxic shame all of
which are a very long process but again
that process begins with recognizing
that there's a difference between you
your core self or your soul if that's an
easier thing for you to think of it as
and you your disregulated traumatized
triggered cell one is a series of
responses that you developed as a normal
reaction to the circumstances you were
in and the other is your utterly lovable
human it and that's the thing that we
start to uncover and interact with more
and more as we move through the healing
process seventh thing it may have been
helpful for you to know growing up with
complex PTSD is that a lot of time when
you are procrastinating what you are
actually doing is spending the
appropriate amount of time responding to
really intense and overwhelming feelings
if we are living with this chronic toxic
shame our brains are going to be
spending a lot of time desperately
trying to get us out of that shame State
and trying to get us to find anything in
our environment or in ourselves that
makes us feel okay and like it is a good
thing for us to want to keep getting up
in the mornings and trying again and so
if you have a high number of things in
your life that trigger you into a toxic
shame spiral which is highly likely if
you have complex BTSD essentially
anytime one of those triggers goes off
you are no longer in relationship with
the thing you were doing that triggered
that thing you are now in relationship
with your own trauma response and that
is a very timec consuming thing to be in
relationship with so as an example of
this let's say you have a lot of anxiety
around doing your taxes or getting some
other thing done that the average secure
person maybe doesn't like doing but
doesn't have a trigger around and maybe
the reason why it feels so challenging
for you is because every time you think
of doing your taxes you have an image
conjured up in your brain of an
authority figure who there is going to
be a humongous repercussion for you
around if you get one thing wrong and so
now you're trying to do this task that
is complex but not impossible but your
brain is responding to it as though you
are in extreme danger so your fight ORF
flight response comes online and now you
can't focus and now because you can't
focus you might go into that toxic shame
response of why why can't I do even the
simplest task and as soon as toxic shame
is activated now your entire system is
trying to regulate you out of that state
of Shame and so now what you're dealing
with is multiple simultaneous triggers
and this is much different than trying
to do your taxes in a regulated state
but that might be the only thing that
you are conscious of yourself doing
because you're not used attending to
your inner emotional world as something
that is real so if you think I have this
whole day to do my taxes and I'm not
doing them you might come up with
stories like well I'm just a lazy person
who doesn't care about myself when in
reality what's actually happening for
you if you have those triggers online
when you sit down to do your taxes is
you are now managing a humongous amount
of trigger and shame and those things
are deeply timec consuming any secure
person who is hit with a trigger and a
shame response as large as the ones that
you may frequently experience would also
need hours upon hours upon hours to try
to regulate themselves around that and
so this is a framing I actually tend to
find really helpful when it comes to
those small tasks that feel triggering
instead of saying I spent 8 hours trying
to fill out one form today I can tell
myself I spent 8 hours managing my toxic
shame today and one or maybe zero hours
filling out the form but I did not spend
eight hours trying to fill out the form
that is not accurate I spent my time and
energy responding to a trigger that came
up if you live with chronic triggers you
do have less hours in the day than the
average person in the sense of you have
less time in the day when you are
regulated and therefore able to deal
effectively with the tasks in front of
you and again I say this not to be
discouraging because this is absolutely
something that can and will change
during the healing process but I say it
as a means of helping us context what
we're dealing with properly so that
we're not shaming ourselves in areas
where it doesn't make sense to do that
eight thing you may not have learned
growing up with complex PTSD is that
other people are chronically taking cues
from you around how to interact with you
and sometimes what you think is
senseless rejection is in fact a product
of other people not knowing how to read
you properly so growing up with toxic
shame or complex PTSD means that you
usually learn to inhibit quite a bit of
your
self-concept but you might not be
conscious of the fact that you were
doing that because you learned to do it
so young to hide certain emotions or
certain inner states from the people
around you that you might actually have
no idea that you are not wearing your
emotions on your face and your body to
the same degree as other people so you
might see other more secur leaning
people walking around the world
interacting with each other and being
quite naturally attuned to each other
you might see one person sitting down
having a kind of rough day looking for
Lauren and another person coming up and
asking them hey what's up it seems like
you're feeling down do you want to talk
about it or coming over and telling them
a joke to cheer them up whatever it is
and then you might notice that on the
days where you're feeling forlorn or
down nobody comes to you and asks you
what's wrong or offers to cheer you up
with a joke and you might start
internalizing people just don't care
about me I am just not as worthy a
person as other people or else people
would also be coming up to me and
showing me the same care that they give
to each other but you might be missing a
really crucial piece of information here
which is that others might not be able
to read you as clearly as they can read
other more secure leaning people because
you probably do have a significant
amount of emotional inhibition going on
that you are not aware of so when you're
feeling down or when you're struggling
with something the look on your face
might be one of grumpiness that other
people kind of read as don't talk to me
or you might chronically mask in a way
that causes you to always look upbeat
and cheerful even when you are
absolutely dying inside and when this is
the case other people do not get the
appropriate cues from you a or go they
don't know how to check in with you and
attune to you the way that they do to
each other but this is not necessarily
because they don't care about you it
could be because they have no idea what
is going on for you this can become a
kind of spiraling problem because if you
don't know how to access a lot of your
emotion States and emote them to other
people you might also have trouble
forming close connections so this might
make it into the realm of reality where
you truly do have less people who are
coming to you and checking in on you and
vice versa because you haven't learned
the connecting skills that other people
learned early on a key part of those
being showing your emotions a little bit
all of the time and of course this
problem is again compounded by the fact
that if you have trauma triggers online
your emotions might be much bigger than
the average person's especially if
you've not received any support for
working through that trauma so by
adulthood you might be unconsciously and
consciously inhibiting but the important
thing here to keep in mind is just to
note that we want to make sure we're
giving things the right attribution so
if you notice that you struggle socially
more so than the average person either
in terms of forming connections or
forming intimate connections that you
can actually rely on for emotional
support it probably isn't because you're
just flawed and broken and someone who
nobody would ever care to be close to it
might be because there are social skills
you genuinely missed learning about
early on in life that make it hard for
other people to know how to connect with
you and this is once again something
that can be wor worked on in the healing
process but what we're looking at today
is just putting everything into the
right context and this is one we want to
stay really aware of ninth thing you may
not have learned if you have complex
BTSD is that good people do bad things
and the degree to which we recover from
those bad things and learn how to behave
in a more pro-social way is often in
direct proportion to how much love and
guidance we receive if when you were
young anytime you made a mistake or
messed something up or hurt somebody
which everybody does every person out
there makes mistakes and hurts other
people sometimes really badly when we
have people and environments and
communities that we trust who can help
guide us through those mistakes and show
us how to behave in a more pro-social
empathetic way without writing us off as
people in the process of that that is
how we learn to exist in a healthy way
in the world and as adults if we are not
used to receiving any sort of guidance
or support from our environments when we
make mistakes and when we hurt people
instead of looking around us for
guidance and care and empathy and help
in writing our wrongs we learn to Simply
inhibit berate ourselves and go back
into those toxic shame beliefs of I am a
bad person person who hurts other people
but a big thing that it's important to
internalize in the healing process is
that mistakes will happen for the rest
of your life and as we start to heal
from insecure attachment or complex PTSD
or early trauma one of the main things
we learn is that if we are honest with
ourselves and other people about why we
made the mistakes we did and why we hurt
people in the ways that we did we slowly
learn over time how to behave in a way
that respects both our pain and other
people's pain in equal measure and the
healthier we get the more we learn to
surround ourselves with healthy others
who can do that kind of work with us and
who can hold us and support us through
the mistakes we make and we slowly learn
that other people are the resources we
need the most when we are messing up the
most relationships are not supposed to
be the things that we pull ourselves
back from and deprive our ourselves of
when we are struggling they are the very
resource that is going to help us out of
that struggle if and when we don't have
the answers we need for how to change on
our own and this is one that likely
takes a long time to start correcting
because we need to learn to trust in
small increments and we need to learn to
have good discernment about which people
to surround ourselves with in small
increments and so again this often
happens over a period of years in the
attachment and Trauma healing process
but that process of being honest with
others and receiving feedback and being
loved and held through our mistakes is
one that we need to navigate the rest of
our lives in a secure way because we
will not ever in any version of reality
be able to design a life in the future
where we never again make a mistake the
best we can do any of us complex BTSD or
no complex BTSD is design a life where
we are held cared about and supported
through our mistakes both internally and
externally as much as is reasonable 10th
thing though really this list could
stretch on into eternity that you may
not have internalized if you grew up
with complex PTSD is that hope often
comes about from a change in
circumstances and that we can actually
act our way into a better inner world
and this might sound very silly to you
if you did not grow up with complex PTSD
you might have no idea what I'm talking
about but essentially when you do grow
up with complex PTSD one of the core
traits is that you have learned
helplessness because when you were a
child you may have been truly powerless
over the circumstances that you were in
you may have learned that there's no way
to change your circumstances AO if you
want to have a different feeling other
than the feelings of frustration anger
hopelessness whatever it is that are a
product of your environment you have to
learn how to dissociate into a fantasy
world where everything is perfect and
nothing hurts and when we learn to
regulate ourselves that way we can
develop a huge blind spot around the
fact that things like hope and happiness
and love can be found in the world
outside of us not just in the world that
exists inside of our minds and
imaginations and once again that video
on emotional neglect that I have Linked
In the description of this video is
going to be really helpful here for kind
of wrapping your mind around the
disconnect that you might chronically be
experiencing between your inner world
and your outer world but the idea is
that as we go through the healing
process of complex BTSD what we learn is
that now as adults with much higher
degrees of agency than we had as
children we're now able to go out and
interact with the world in a way that
genuinely changes our inner emotional
state as a true reflection of what's
happening in our outer world not because
we are fantasizing about a different
world and so sometimes in our adult
lives we're going to have to go after
hope and optimism with a club and learn
to proactively seek out environments and
opportunities that will put more hope
into our true reality and when we have
more hope and opportunity in our lives
our inner state begins to heal as an
authentic response to what's going on
around us not as a product of
dissociating from it so this is
essentially the process of learning to
strengthen the relationship between your
inner world and the outer world and how
those two things interact with each
other and can interact with each other
in a way that is highly positive but
again this takes some time to learn and
deeply
internalize it's about slowly increasing
our agency and our connecting abilities
to the point where we learn that the
world outside of our minds is actually a
much better place to exist than the
world inside of our minds because the
world outside of our Minds is a world
that is real and that can offer us
meaning in ways that our fantasy world
could never properly give us and this
becomes clearer and clearer the longer
we walk down that path towards healing
from complex
PTSD all right this has been quite a bit
for today so I am going to leave it at
this though again there are many many
many more lessons that we could have
internalized that would have been really
helpful for our processing early on if
we have complex PTSD
but what I hope is that this has given
you some context on some of the things
that you may once have chocked up to
just being a terrible person and that
you can now start to see yourself in a
little bit more of a holistic way which
is really important for all of the work
that we do when we start to heal from
this as always any questions comments
perspectives you have please leave in
the comments section of this video I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again really soon
[Music]