hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel today I
want to talk about complex PTSD and what
to expect realistically out of the
recovery process so this summer I am
rereading Pete Walker's Incredible Book
complex PTSD from surviving to thriving
if you have been around this channel for
a while you've heard me recommend this
book so many times by now and I'm not
going to stop I promise I do not get any
sort of commission out of recommending
this book it is just such an invaluable
resource that has helped me so immensely
on my own healing journey and going
through it again this summer has been a
really interesting experience for me
because it's about three or four years
after I picked it up for the first time
and in that time I've done intensive
trauma attachment and shame healing work
and I'm noticing myself reflecting quite
a bit on what I thought the healing
process would look like when I first
read this book versus what I've actually
gotten out of it and the ways in which
my life has tangible changed since that
summer that I picked it up for the first
time and I have kind of a sneaky reason
for wanting to make this video which is
that I think a lot of people who
struggle with complex PTSD in the early
stages struggle immensely with even
identifying with the term it's so
Insidious because toxic shame and
complex PTSD can give us this feeling of
oh I'm just over exaggerating this is
all in my head I'm just whining about
things it wasn't that bad right I wasn't
locked in an attic for years at a time
as a child Ergo there's no way that I
could possibly have trauma despite
having all of these pervasive symptoms
of trauma consistently rearing their
heads and wreaking havoc on our lives so
if that's kind of the place that you're
in I want you to just keep an open mind
as you go through this video and
consider whether these 10 signs of
recovery would make a significant
difference in your life or not and if
even one of them would I want to
encourage you to give yourself the
opportunity to begin developing in that
direction I'm not going to say that
there's very little to lose in engaging
in trauma work because it truly does
mean restructuring the way that we
approach our lives and our relationships
and that can cause a lot of upheaval in
our lives but it also allows us a way
out of this kind of emotional and mental
chaos that tends to characterize the
lives of those who struggle with complex
PTSD prior to giving it a proper name
which naturally transitions me to the
first point on this list so the first
thing I want to talk about today that
characterizes a certain degree of
recovery from complex PTSD or toxic
shame is you're able to look back at
your life including a lot of the chaos
and Challenge and struggle that has been
a significant part of it and you no
longer chalk all of that up to you just
being a flawed and defective person so
this might include things like having
severe difficulty in forming Intimate
Relationships whether that's friendships
or romantic relationships struggling to
set and Achieve goals that feel
meaningful for you consistently managing
your mental or physical health
developing healthy communication skills
the list goes on if you don't understand
the root cause of these problems which
is in the case of cptsd Developmental
trauma it's likely that you're going to
spend the majority of your life and your
energy managing the symptoms of these
problems and then when you're unable to
do so consistently because you're not
really getting them at the root cause
you're just kind of playing whack-a- all
with them the story you might tell
yourself if you have that shame bound
personality is the reason I can't just
get it together and be a normal person
is because I am defective and flawed and
there is something wrong with me in the
healing process you're able to look back
over your life including the failed
relationships the ways in which you have
let yourself down the opportunities you
miss the mental health challenges you
develop the ways you neglected to take
care of yourself and you're able to give
a proper name for the root cause of
those problems which is complex trauma
and framing it this way is likely to
take a lot of Shame out of your own
self-concept because you know that you
are not just a failure who can't get
anything right you've been grappling
with some really deep wounds that you
were previously ill-equipped to cope
with second thing you can realistically
expect in the healing process from
complex PTSD is you learn to seek enough
solace in Intimate Relationships and the
reason I use enough here is because this
isn't a Redemption fantasy having
complex trauma and deep interpersonal
wounding from a young age does mean it's
a pretty big uphill battle when it comes
to forming and maintaining healthy
relationships but as Pete Walker says
we're not looking for Perfection we're
looking for good enough for a lot of my
early life I kind of felt like I was
living in this desert when it came to
connection I didn't have the skills to
actually share my authentic self with
people and so I was only forming very
superficial connections that weren't
really enough to sustain me emotionally
and the problem with being in that kind
of desert of loneliness was that anytime
someone came by and they had a water
bottle even if there was poison in it I
would take it from them and drink it
because there was this part of me that
so desperately wanted to be seen on a
deep level that I didn't really care
what the cost of that was and sometimes
there was a really high cost because
often the only people I felt deeply seen
by were other people who struggled with
toxic shame and Trauma themselves and
who like myself for much of my early
life did not have healthy relating
skills and at this point in my life I
would say there are two people in my
life who both know me very deeply and
care about me in a fairly consistent way
as well as a slowly expanding circle of
people who I believe it might be
possible for me to form those types of
connections with in the future and
having those connections is kind of like
having a narrow River of fresh water
through that desert so it's not an ocean
by any means it's not an oasis in the
desert but it provides me with enough
deep connection to sustain me and what
that means is that when someone walks by
and they offer a water bottle that is
poisoned I can say no thank you I'm okay
and I can use the water that I have to
strengthen myself enough to slowly keep
expanding that River over time so again
a healed state does not mean your life
is suddenly bursting with deep intimate
connections but it does likely mean that
you no longer longer have to reach and
cling to really unhealthy Dynamics out
of desperation that's sort of what I
consider healed enough on the relational
level when it comes to toxic shame third
thing you might be able to realistically
expect in the healing process is an
increased ability to recognize when
you're in an emotional flashback and to
be forgiving towards yourself about the
less than perfect ways that you cope
while you're in them so experiencing an
emotional flashback or a period of age
regression very often leads us to
grasping for Primal coping mechanisms so
things like Comfort eating
self-medicating in some cases seeking
out compulsive attention or sex and in
the recovery process we can learn that
the real problem is not that we lack
self-control it's that we're either
triggered in some way or there's some
feeling very alive inside of our bodies
that we haven't yet found a way to
consciously recognize and address so our
inner children are working overtime to
try to seek out the comfort that we need
and at this point in my own life I like
to think of those kind of Primal
self-soothing behaviors that come online
when I'm having an emotional flashback
as my inner child desperately tugging on
my sleeve trying to get me to pay
attention to something so while it might
be frustrating to see ourselves acting
out in these ways it can also be a
wake-up call that there's something
happening in our lives or there's some
situation that is triggering us that we
haven't become consciously aware of but
that needs our attention this could be a
current situation or it could be
memories that a current situation brings
up about a past trauma that we have left
unprocessed and that now wants our time
and attention and learning to work with
those things is a very long process but
the important part is that in the
healing process we learn as much as we
can to stop shaming ourselves for
experiencing emotional flashbacks and we
can increasingly look at those periods
as a call for our adult selves to step
in and attend to whatever it is that our
inner children are reacting to with the
love and compassion that was perhaps not
available to us when we encountered the
same types of triggers or challenges in
our early life fourth thing you can
realistically expect from the healing
process when it comes to complex PTSD
and shamework is you increasingly
develop the ability to stand up for
yourself without being in a fight
response so in his book complex PTSD
Pete Walker talks about the fun response
and the fight response being it kind of
opposite ends of a Continuum so we might
immediately self-abandon when someone
seems displeased with us and just do
whatever it takes to soothe and appease
them and then on the other side of that
Spectrum we have the fight response
which is being in kind of Attack Mode
when we assert our wants and needs and
in the middle of that spectrum is
healthy assertiveness so the ability to
stand up for yourself in a way that is
both firm but also respectful of others
and in my opinion there is exactly one
key to assertiveness and that thing is
the belief that you matter if I know
that I am a valuable worthwhile person
who cares about both myself and other
people it's actually pretty easy to
learn where to set my boundaries and how
to enforce them but it is really hard to
do that if I believe either that I'm a
piece of garbage or that I will never be
happy until everybody else attends to my
needs for me and the further you move
along in the recovery process from
having a shame-bound identity the more
you're able to internalize the fact that
you do matter and that your feelings and
needs are important to you and that's
all that you need in order to set
assertive boundaries for yourself and
again that's a long process but it is
absolutely possible fifth thing you can
realistically expect from the complex
PTSD healing process is you start to
develop increasingly good discernment
about who to trust and in what capacity
and the latter is very important so
before I took on any sort of healing
work in my life I remember feeling like
the only other people who kind of got me
were other people who had some version
of complex trauma extreme attachment
wounding or toxic shame or depression or
some other debilitating mental illness
themselves and I didn't put it in that
language right the language that I kind
of had at that point was I messed up and
I only get along with other messed up
people when I stand next to someone who
I consider normal I feel like a freak
and I can not wait to get out of there
and so what I tended to think was
because someone gets me and because they
aren't put off by my kind of rotating
door of neuroses that they see once they
get close enough that must mean that
this is a good person for me to get
really close to and to start to
co-regulate with now again I would never
use that language at that time I would
think more along the lines of thank God
Another Broken person let's go party and
at this point in my journey what I've
learned is that yes I'm probably forever
no matter how far I come along this road
going to relate best to those who also
have a history of toxic shame or trauma
but in order to trust someone to be a
good person for me to get really close
to and to start co-regulating with they
also need to be reasonably good at
self-regulating the same way that I am
now reasonably good at self-regulating
otherwise our relationship is going to
become a giant mess of projections that
it's really difficult to resolve and
that can be extremely emotionally and
practically destructive so you learn
discernment about who to trust in what
capacity and with what and that
discernment allows all of our
relationships to get better because we
have realistic expectations for them
sixth thing that might happen in the
complex PTSD healing process is you're
increasingly able to navigate through
making mistakes without brutal
self-shaming at the advanced levels you
can even have compassion for yourself as
you move through mistakes because your
inner parent can lovingly let your inner
child know that it's a good thing to be
trying in life and trying means you are
going to get a certain proportion of
things wrong if you were brutally shamed
for mistakes when you were young it's
highly likely that you internalize that
same critical voice around making
mistakes as an adult but what a good
enough parent does for their child is
show up for them the hardest when
they've made a mistake because they know
that that's when that child needs the
most compassion encouragement support
and guidance and you can train yourself
to be that type of inner parent for
yourself so so I've talked about this in
a different video but there is this song
by the band Muna called number one fan
where there's this lyric in it that goes
I've been looking at myself in the
mirror saying don't leave me now don't
leave me now and that is something that
I have literally done during really bad
toxic shame flare-ups when I have truly
messed something up in my life in my
relationships when I've genuinely let
myself down in some way I look at myself
in the mirror and I go don't leave me
now this is when I need my own
compassion the most right it doesn't
really count as self-love if I only show
up for myself and I only love myself on
the days when I'm doing everything right
and it's really easy to love myself it
counts as deep pervasive self-love if
I'm able to show up and have compassion
for myself when I'm struggling the most
and a big part of the complex PTSD
healing process is learning to re-parent
yourself in a way that is loving
understanding and patient because you
now know that everybody makes mistakes
that is a part of life and it is a good
thing to make them you don't need to
hate yourself for not getting everything
right the first time seventh thing you
can expect to happen in the complex PTSD
or toxic shame recovery process is that
you start to have a restored faith that
there are kind and competent adults out
there who you have the ability to learn
from this is something that Pete Walker
talks about extensively in his book and
he talks about his own process which
almost creepily mirrors my own of first
finding solace in a whole bunch of
self-help and psychology books and
recognizing the authors of these books
seem both very intelligent and also very
compassionate and he describes that as
helping to grow his faith that there
were adults out there in the world like
that which helped him make the leap into
therapy and then that therapeutic
relationship helped him make the leap
into forming healthier relationships in
his life outside of therapy and that is
almost word for word the exact process
that I went through as well so I found
that when I was in the thick of my
wounding I was constantly unconsciously
seeking out mentorship from people who I
only connected with using my false self
so these were people who didn't really
share my interests or values in a deep
way and so of course I continuously
ended up in situations where I felt like
all of the adults are kind of
incompetent and inconsiderate but that's
in large part because the basis of my
interaction with them was an inauthentic
one I didn't really respect their
intellect or values but I was claiming
to want to learn from them anyway and
that is a situation that sets us up for
ongoing disappointment it's only when we
are choosing our mentors from our
authentic selves who truly know what we
value and what interests us that we're
able to actually get the growth out of
the whole shebang for me I think a big
part of my healing process in this
capacity was taking a degree in
attachment Theory and research which I
completed at the University of
Roehampton which is in London England
and the professors at that school were
so intelligent and such genuinely
critical thinkers but also they were
deeply invested in the well-being of
children and just encountering and
getting to learn from a group of people
like that was healing on a deep level
for me it restored my faith in a large
degree that there are highly competent
adults out there who care about the same
things I care about and are paying
attention to the same things I'm paying
attention to and every time I encounter
someone like that I feel like a little
part of my soul relaxes a little bit
more into life and that is ideally a
continuously unfolding process that you
go through as you heal from relational
trauma learning that you can use your
discernment to figure out who it's safe
to learn from and who might just not be
the best Mentor for you eighth thing you
might realistically be able to expect
out of the cptsd or toxic shame healing
process is that you're increasingly able
to take some risks in your life and I'm
not talking about the kind of desperate
Reckless risks that you might take when
you're driven from a place of toxic
shame and you're trying to solve some
problem or get some form of connection
in a way that feels desperate and dire
I'm talking about having a stable enough
life which might take many many years to
build for yourself that you actually
feel like you can open yourself up to
some genuine vulnerability knowing that
you will be there to help yourself pick
up the pieces if it doesn't work out so
you can actually let your inner child
kind of come out to play more in your
day-to-day life because you've set up a
life where you are self-protective
enough to know that you will recognize
your own limits when you reach them and
enforce your boundaries where you need
to and as such once again you can take
more risks and either fail more and
learn from it or reap some pretty cool
rewards ninth thing you can expect out
of the cptsd healing process is that you
slowly develop an awareness that your
recovery is not going to look like
anybody else's so I think that when I
was in the thick of my shame I I had
this idea that healing was kind of like
having the ultimate hiding place like I
was always looking for ways in which I
could hide away and disconnect from the
person that I actually was and when I
started doing counseling and Recovery
work I was like this is great I can
eventually get to a place where I can
hide my true self so deeply that nobody
will ever know it was there and the
biggest kind of surprise in my own
healing process was recognizing that
actual healing was about reclaiming the
person I actually am and no longer being
ashamed to show that person to the world
and to let myself form connections with
other people based on my authentic self
I think that if I could teleport back in
time and tell myself like five years ago
that this was a possibility I wouldn't
even bother because I would not have
believed myself I would have been like
five years from now Heidi whatever path
you think you're on you are wrong get
back here and hide every part of
yourself if there's anything I'm sure of
it's that your authentic self is not
ever going to bring you love or
Connection in the world and this is one
of those times where it just feels so
good to be wrong the more we heal the
more we intuitively learn that not only
can other people love us because of who
we are not despite it we can also love
ourselves in that way we can look back
at the lives we've had and all of the
maladapting coping mechanisms we use to
get through that life and we can be
grateful for every past version of
ourselves so what I now know is that
healing is not ever going to make me
look like a person who is raised
securely attached and has no history of
Developmental trauma but it is going to
make me look like the person I actually
am which is a person who fought her
entire life the best that she could and
I can be genuinely proud of every past
version of myself that in some way
brought me here which leads us neatly
into the 10th and last thing we're going
to talk about today which is that a big
part of the complex PTSD or toxic shame
healing process is dropping what Pete
Walker calls the Salvation fantasy and
accepting that there is no no state in
which you are going to feel permanently
good happy loved accepted and okay
forever life has Ebbs and flows and I
really love what Pete Walker talks about
in his book as the Continuum between
surviving and thriving so there are
going to be periods in all of our lives
where we feel like we are absolutely
knocking it out of the ballpark and if
you have a history of complex trauma
those times may feel few and far between
so when they come up in the healing
process you might feel kind of desperate
to cling on to them and to make sure
that now that you have this feeling of
health and vitality and aliveness you
never want to lose it and then the
tectonic plates of your life are going
to shift as they always do and at some
point you will find yourself back in a
period where you are just trying to keep
your head above water that period of
being in survival mode and the more we
resist accepting that we're in one of
those periods of surviving the more
we're likely to turn to those unhealthy
coping mechanisms to kind of dissociate
from the whole thing so Pete Walker in
his book once again talks about how
self-medicating can be something that we
do in order to try to prolong a state of
thriving and refuse to accept that we're
now in a survival State and the way that
I've come to like to think about it is
that those survival periods are my
opportunities to practice deep humility
no matter how much work I do in my life
I don't ever want to believe that I am
above struggling so whenever I find
myself in that state of resisting
something difficult that I'm going
through which happens frequently I do
not go down without a fight I try to
reframe it as it is my time to be taught
it is my time to humble myself and let
life teach me whatever lesson I
currently need to learn so John Bradshaw
who wrote The Incredible Book healing
the shame that binds you talks about how
people who have shame bound identities
tend to think of themselves as either
less than human so kind of broken flawed
and no good or more than human so kind
of pumping up our egos to compensate for
what we lack in genuine self-love so
when I catch myself feeling less than
human and telling myself things like I
deserve poor treatment or other people
are inherently worthier or better than
me and deserve good treatment that I do
not deserve I know that it's time to
step into my dignity and to start
tending to my own right to exist and to
be valued but when I'm feeling more than
human and I'm kind of resisting my own
suffering I know that it's time to
assume a position of humility and to
step back and allow whatever lesson I
need to be taught to be taught to me and
it's this strange kind of paradox that I
find myself repeatedly arriving back at
that sometimes when I'm struggling the
most and when I'm doing the most kind of
self-sabotaging behaviors what I
actually need is more humility I need to
accept I'm not above struggling I'm not
above feeling sad I'm not above being
disappointed and I can be grateful for
the opportunities that are afforded to
me through every season of my life the
good ones and the bad ones because once
again healing from complex PTSD
development mental trauma or toxic shame
does not mean our lives feel wonderful
forever it just means that during the
darker periods we are able to stay on
our own teams because we finally believe
that we are valuable human beings who
are worth showing up and fighting for
and that includes fighting for our own
dignity personally and interpersonally
all right these 10 things are far from
the only things that you can expect out
of the toxic shame or complex PTSD
healing process but I wanted to bring
them up as some kind of realistic
guideposts that you can look for As you
move through this process as always let
me know in the comments what you're
thinking feeling experiencing as you
watch this video also as always I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]