hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we use
different psychological models as means
of understanding ourselves better
understanding other people better and
overall trying to improve the health of
our relationships and our life in
general so what that means is getting
more of what we do want out of our lives
and our relationships and less of what
we don't want and today the
psychological model I'm going to be
referencing is the model of complex
post-traumatic stress disorder now I'm
not going to go too deep into what cptsd
is if you don't know I will leave some
links in the description of this video
so you can go learn a little bit more
before coming back but I also want to
make it clear that you don't have to
have cptsd to relate to what I'm going
to say in this video so much of what I
say is going to apply to anyone who
struggles with feelings of toxic shame
as well as anyone who may have a very
insecure attachment style so the reason
I'm using the term cptsd is because I
believe that what I'm about to talk
about applies most directly to those
with cptsd however if you recognize
yourself in this video it doesn't
necessarily mean you have cptsd because
the cycle that I'm about to describe is
going to apply to people in a wide range
of contexts so what I want to talk about
today is the relationship between toxic
shame and procrastination and how this
can become a cycle that ends up feeling
quite self-defeating for a lot of people
who struggle with it so the
procrastination or the not getting
things done or the watching problems in
your life pile up larger and larger over
time is kind of what I look at as a
symptom of a more underlying problem the
underlying problem being a sense of
toxic shame and the belief that
everything that goes wrong in your life
that the ways in which you struggle to
tend to practical or emotional or
relational concerns is due to you just
being an inherently flawed or broken
person
what I want to do with this video is
start to dispel that myth and offer some
perspective and some language that might
help you reconceptualize why certain
areas of your life tend to get to these
kind of emergency points as well as what
tools you can use to start slowly
reversing that process and the last
thing I want to make clear before we get
started is that I am not a licensed
psychologist so this is not clinical
advice I do have a bachelor's degree in
Psychology and a master of science in
attachment Theory and research so some
of what I'm going to say is informed
from my background in attachment Theory
however all I'm doing here is looking at
patterns that exist within what I
personally have read and observed in
people I know who struggle with complex
PTSD toxic shame and insecure attachment
patterns so like with anything if
there's something in this video that
works for you feel free to take it and
leave whatever does not work for you
alright without further Ado to get us
started off I want to lay out a formula
of what tends to happen when someone who
has a strong sense of toxic shame or
complex PTSD encounters a life stressor
and I want to contrast it to what
someone with a more secure sense of self
or a secure attachment style is going to
do in the same type of situation and the
reason I want to provide that contrast
is because I want to start normalizing
some of the challenges that those of us
with toxic shame face that we might be
wrongly attributing to a failure of the
self or something being broken corrupt
or wrong with the self when in fact we
are just coming up across stressors that
the average person experiences but might
not end up in the same kind of downwards
mental health spiral around them because
they are able to properly attribute the
cause of their stress as opposed to
over-assuming responsibility for
everything that is going wrong so
without further Ado let's look at what
happens when a secure person versus
someone with toxic shame attachment
wounding or cptsd encounters a major
life stressor so major life stressors
happen to absolutely everybody it does
not matter what your upbringing was like
what your attachment style is life is
inherently stressful
challenges come up curveballs get thrown
in our path relationships involve
conflicts that become challenging right
experiencing stress is inherent to being
alive so let's say you come up against a
major life stressor and I'll give some
examples just so we can kind of track
this with something real let's say you
suddenly lose your job or you don't have
a job and rent is coming up and you
don't have a way to make rent that would
be considered a major life stressor
let's say you are taking a graduate
program and you have a dissertation due
and you are ill prepared to finish it on
time
let's say you are in a relationship and
you're feeling a little bit uncertain
and like your partner might not
necessarily want a future with you and
you're feeling kind of rejected all of
these things are normal life stressors
they could happen to anybody it doesn't
mean there's something wrong with you
however the way someone with cptsd or
toxic shame is going to interpret these
stressors is going to be very different
than the way a secure person does so a
secure person when encountering a life
stressor tends to have a sense of
self-compassion around it so there's
this feeling of something difficult is
happening for me I'm stressed about it
and that stress is often seen and
acknowledged and accepted but the next
step because there is an assumption
inherent to the secure world view that
stress is a normal part of life is to
find ways to cope with that stress that
actually help the problem get solved and
I want to be very clear this is much
easier for the person with a secure
attachment system to do because it's
highly likely that they have a social
network that they can reach out to to
receive a reasonable level of support
it's highly likely that they developed
strong emotional regulation skills in
childhood or that they taught those to
themselves in adulthood if they earn
secure attachment and it's likely that
they have not encountered a
disproportionate amount of extreme
stressors in their life that's not a
guarantee that's not to say that there
are not secure people who've experienced
extreme stressors however it's less
likely because if you do not have a
complex trauma history you're more
likely to have a more resourced life in
every sense of the term so a secure
person who doesn't have a way to make
rent next month or who's going through a
significant educational or Relationship
Challenge is highly likely to recognize
that they need both comfort and support
in order to navigate through that
challenge so what they're going to do is
go okay I'm stressed so maybe I'm going
to need to reach out to my social
support Network and lean a little bit
more heavily on my friends family loved
ones than I normally do as I'm
navigating through this period of
difficulty
also I'm going to think about where I
might be able to Source help so if I'm
struggling academically which professors
should I go talk to to see what I should
do if I'm struggling financially are
there Social Services I can look at that
might be able to help me figure out
where I can get the resources I need if
I'm in a pinch if I'm struggling in my
relationship who might I be able to go
talk to or is there a professional I
could consult to kind of figure out
what's going on and gain some additional
context for myself or some additional
skills for myself if that's what's
needed to help me navigate through any
of these specific challenges and because
there's this natural sense of
interconnectedness in the secure world
view it tends to be easier for them to
go access the services they need as well
as the social support that they need to
navigate through periods of stress more
effectively now let's contrast this to
someone who has complex PTSD insecure
attachment or toxic shame or all of the
above as it often happens when you
experience a life stressor as a member
of one of those groups what's highly
likely to happen is that you're not
going to recognize your own need for
comfort and support particularly if you
have complex PTSD which is the result of
early repetitive traumas that leave you
with the feeling of hopelessness so
there is a learned helplessness aspect
to complex PTSD if you have certain
traumas like let's say a specific
relational trauma that happens over and
over again and you don't see a way out
of it because you are a child when it
happens and you're under resourced you
might develop this world view of
problems are not solvable as soon as a
problem feels a certain level of big and
overwhelming there is no way out of the
problem I just assume I'm going to be
stuck inside of this problem forever
what might not occur to you is that
there are social resources that are
available to you or that you might need
some comfort and social support
navigating through the challenge the
reason those things might not occur to
you is because you may have internalized
from a very young age social systems are
not here to help me they're for normal
people and I am not normal which is a
core belief of having toxic shame Ergo
there are not social support networks
that I can reach out to for practical
help and you may not even be cognizant
of the fact that you have a need for
Comfort period because most people with
complex PTSD toxic shame or severe
attachment wounding did not receive
Comfort on a consistent basis in their
childhood you may never have learned
that life stressors are easier to deal
with if you have comfort you may have
internalized something along the lines
of what helps you get through difficult
periods is sucking it up pushing down
your feelings and barreling through
however your system still needs Comfort
even if you have consciously repressed
the need for it your system is going to
naturally crave it when you are going
through difficult periods so that leads
us to what tends to happen next for
people who consciously or unconsciously
deny or repress the need for comfort and
help when they're facing a life stressor
and what tends to happen next is that
dysregulation and procrastination pop up
now if you have a very strong need for
Comfort help and support however you're
not even aware that you have it which is
very typical for those with toxic shame
where that feeling of vulnerability may
have become a shame-bound emotion so as
soon as you feel like you need help you
can't figure something out on your own
whatever it is shame comes and wraps
that up you're now going to start
feeling dysregulated dysregulation
happens when we can't directly resolve
the feeling that we are experiencing if
you have hidden the feeling that you are
experiencing from yourself because it's
shame bound it's going to be really hard
to resolve it so if I'm feeling kind of
vulnerable because I don't know how to
pay my rent next month or because I
don't know how to access the resources I
need to finish my educational project or
because I don't really understand what's
going wrong in my relationship or how to
stop these problems from happening if
I'm unable to access and directly deal
with my feelings of vulnerability I'm
going to become disregulated I'm going
to start feeling those emotions in
places where they don't necessarily fit
so instead of feeling vulnerable maybe
I'll start feeling really grumpy or
really irritable or maybe I'm going to
experience extreme difficulty focusing
and paying attention to the projects
that I meant to be working on because my
system is desperately trying to seek out
the comfort that it needs it's
distracted by its own unmet emotional
needs which live in the body however if
I'm not acknowledging those emotions in
my mind and acting in accordance with
them I'm going to experience
dysregulation now the problem is that
when we are in this state of dealing
with extreme stress it's very important
for us to be able to focus to solve
those problems right if I have to figure
out how to make rent next month I
probably need to focus on getting work
if I need to figure out how to get a
school project done I probably need to
focus on doing research if I need to
solve a series of problems in my
partnership I probably need to stay
reasonably present with my partner to be
able to take in what they're saying and
respond in an appropriate way however it
gets harder to do all of this the more
dysregulated you are air go you start
procrastinating not because you are a
lazy worthless human being but because
your system is preoccupied trying to get
its underlying needs met and if you
don't know how to get those needs met
directly you're going to turn to
maladaptive coping mechanisms so maybe I
figure out that I can concentrate really
well if I take certain drugs maybe I
figure out that I can get support that I
don't know how to ask for out of my
partner if I start a fight and then
afterwards they give me Comfort or maybe
I become so afraid of my partner seeing
that I'm struggling and fearing that
that's going to make them feel disgusted
by me that I completely pull away and
isolate myself because I'm just kind of
in this freeze response of if anyone
sees that I'm struggling I'm going to
get abandoned so to not make the problem
worse I'm going to isolate until it is
over maybe I figure out that I can
Barrel through the day and act tough and
strong and like I don't need any help if
I can promise myself at the end of the
day I'm going to binge eat or get drunk
in order to take off the pressure
so we develop these ways of getting our
needs for Comfort met if we don't know
how to address that need directly in
ways that end up creating further
problems in our lives there's a quote
that goes something along the lines of
at a certain dosage the medicine becomes
the disease so now we find ourselves
facing a new slew of problems and or but
usually and in intensification of the
original problem
if I have not found a way to pay my rent
because I've gotten disregulated around
the fact that I have a problem that big
and then I've been unable to concentrate
on work because I'm stressed and don't
know how to get comfort and then maybe
I'm eating or drinking more than usual
and then maybe I'm spending more money
than usual as an attempt to get my
system to calm down now I'm probably
less able to make rent than I was at the
beginning of the month when the problem
first cropped up or maybe by this point
the ways in which I've been going about
maladaptively unconsciously seeking out
comfort from other people either through
creating conflict or through withdrawing
are causing new problems within my
relationships that have now taken the
center stage of my life so this pile of
problems keeps growing maybe now rent is
overdue and I still have no way to pay
it maybe now my relationship which once
had a certain problem has a whole pile
of problems because I haven't been able
to address the original one in a
well-regulated way and for most people
who deal with complex PTSD toxic shame
or early attachment wounding this is
usually the point where toxic shame
arrives so this belief comes online that
the reason I have this problem is
because I am inherently shameful bad
stupid lazy unmotivated whatever it is I
should have just dealt with this at the
time it came up and now look how big it
is and now look how many other problems
I have in my life and instead of
correctly attributing the cause of those
problems to the fact that you did not
learn proper coping mechanisms for
tackling and sourcing comfort and
support around problems you're going to
attribute the fact that these problems
worsen so heavily towards yourself being
a useless human being you might start
telling yourself these stories like I'm
lazy I'm unmotivated anyone else would
have been able to solve this as soon as
it came up I have to hide from other
people how many problems I have because
if they saw how many problems I have
they would see how worthless and lazy I
am and how I can't do anything right so
toxic shame in the inner critic at this
point might be incredibly online for you
and when we have toxic shame what else
comes online in the body a need for
comfort so now we are all the way back
to the beginning right we have this need
for Comfort we don't necessarily know
how to get it we don't feel like we're
worthy of comfort if we are in a place
of toxic shame and so once again the
system gets disregulated and the cycle
starts over again
now I say all of this and I outline all
of this not to be discouraging I do not
think that this is what you are faded to
if you have toxic shame cptsd whatever
it is I say all of this because there is
something we can use in this process if
we insert it at any point that is going
to help us start to reverse it and start
an upward spiral instead of continuing
that downwards one when we're
experiencing stress in life and the
first thing I want to acknowledge is
that if you are watching this video and
you have complex PTSD I'm going to say
there's like a 99 chance that there has
never been a point where everything is
just going normal for you you have no
significant problems challenges or
stressors and then a singular stressor
pops out of the blue and this cycle
begins you have probably been locked in
this cycle for as long as you can
remember because to have complex PTSD
often means you have extreme difficulty
with forming close relationships
regulating your emotions securing
consistent resource so it's likely that
you have been in this state of
responding to abnormal stressors for as
far back as you can consciously remember
and so you don't necessarily have the
option to just tackle this at step one
like a secure person would and reach out
to your support network of secure people
who have resources they can lend you
that's likely not an option for you or
not an easily available option so we
have to look at what we can do at any
point in this spiral to start moving it
in the opposite direction and what we're
going to talk about now is the role that
self-compassion and self-understanding
can play in this process I think that
for most people with toxic shame the
term self-understanding might feel more
accessible but I will be using the term
self-understanding and self-compassion
interchangeably so the first place you
want to be able to apply self-compassion
or self-understanding is when you are
faced with a significant stressor and
you have a need for Comfort it's
unlikely that you're going to wreck your
need for Comfort consciously if you have
cptsd because again if from a young age
you never got Comfort around life
challenges or you internalize this
belief that unless something so overtly
traumatic has happened to me that
absolutely anybody would be incapable of
functioning in the face of it I do not
have a need or I do not deserve support
care and compassion from other people
what secure people naturally know is
that being alive is inherently difficult
and you need comfort for it you don't
have to be going through something
intense and traumatic to need comfort
people need comfort on a day-to-day
basis they need comfort for being a
little bit tired they need comfort for
having a little bit of stress at work
they need comfort for having a bit of a
tense situation with someone they're
close with and having difficulty feeling
settled in that relationship until they
figure out what's going on people need a
reasonable amount of comfort every
single day and especially when you are
going through some sort of stress
needing Comfort is a normal experience
to have and the reason I want to
emphasize that is because if you sat
down as someone with complex PTSD and
looked at the intense Matrix of all of
the challenges and struggles and
practical and interpersonal difficulties
that you probably have in your life as a
product of having complex PTSD you would
recognize that if you dropped a secure
person into that they would be almost
overwhelmed by a need for comfort
okay so the fact that you are feeling
distressed and disregulated is not weird
and it's not because you're a bad
shameful person who can't cope with
anything if you have a very difficult
life you have a very high need for
comfort and if you're unable to
recognize that need for comfort the
natural response is dysregulation of the
system so if you can at step one that
point where you're feeling stressed and
overwhelmed by either one or a complex
Matrix of problems in your life if you
can recognize and give yourself
validation around the fact that it's
normal to be wanting Comfort at this
point that might be the first step in
getting less dysregulated around all of
these problems if you can look at the
fact that you can't make rent next month
or the fact that you have a giant pile
of overdue bills or the fact that you
have relationships that are in disarray
or the fact that you're really
struggling to keep up with your
educational commitments as problems that
naturally require comfort and support
that might not solve the problem but it
legitimizes the problem right
and if you're able to follow the threads
of these problems back in time until
you're able to undo some of that toxic
shame around the fact that you have them
that could also be helpful so are you in
chaotic relationships all of the time
because you're just a worthless human
being who hates being happy or are you
constantly in chaotic relationships
because you didn't learn appropriate
relating skills as a child you didn't
have secure relationships modeled for
you and you don't actually have the
skills you need to navigate
relationships effectively but if you did
have those skills you would probably use
them that's probably closer to the truth
then I'm just a piece of garbage who
doesn't know how to love or be loved
right
if you look at your financial challenges
not through the lens of I'm just lazy
and didn't work hard enough but through
the lens of I have been low or high
level dysregulated consistently for most
of my life and it's really hard to be
productive and creative when you're
dysregulated might feel a little bit
easier to understand why you're
experiencing chronic financial
difficulties same with difficulties
focusing or paying attention or with not
procrastinating right it is a natural
result of being dysregulated to not be
able to focus well so does this solve
the problem no it does not solve the
problem however it legitimizes the
problem in your own mind if you can stop
shaming yourself for these problems and
understand that you would not have
chosen them nobody would choose to have
an abnormal level of stress in their
life Ergo they must be the result of
your system trying to solve some deeper
problem that it's been incapable of
doing like I don't know how having
healthy human connection having a sense
of self-esteem and self-worth creating
stability in your emotional life if your
body is distracted by needing those
things and not having them it's not
going to naturally want to focus its
attention on doing more practical
concerns so again that's not to be
discouraging it is to legitimize the
fact that you have all of these problems
I remember having this Moment of clarity
years ago when I was in a place in my
life that I now kind of look back on as
almost my rock bottom emotionally where
I was so dysregulated and dealing with
so many issues in my personal life and
in my professional life and it was the
first year of covid so the world was a
mess and I had this one project that I
was struggling so hard to complete and I
was getting paid a lot for the project
and there's big expectations on me for
it and I remember waking up one morning
and just looking at my life almost like
I was a complete Outsider and looking at
the true intensity of the personal
problems I was dealing with at that
point in my life and the true intensity
of the Practical problems I was
experiencing at that point in my life
and going if my client the person who
I'm imagining is going to judge me so
harshly if I do not do a perfect job on
this project if they were truly waking
up in my life in my body in my
relationships in my experience and
having to navigate through this day
would they be able to get this project
done and I realized probably not they
would probably have to stop and triage
and deal with all of these other things
that I so consistently deal with that I
don't even think of them as problems
anymore that they wouldn't be able to
get within a mile of the project and
it's really hard to have those moments
of clarity with ourselves because when
you are adapted to Chronic problems and
to Chronic dysregulation it becomes the
water that you swim in you don't think
this is abnormal and things that most
people don't deal with however it helps
as often as you can to stop and
contextualize that yourself is it
possible that anybody in this situation
would be equally as stressed out and
experience an equal level of difficulty
focusing or getting things done as I am
and if you can have compassion for
yourself in that moment then you are
experiencing a moment of security
a moment in which you're able to
recognize I am an inherently valuable
person just like everybody else which
means that when I experience stress I
need help and comfort just like
everybody else and every time we have a
moment where we're successfully able to
recognize that we start slowly training
our brain to think in a slightly
different way the more moments we have
where we recognize we are inherently
valuable we are not choosing the
challenges and difficulties in our lives
and that it's normal for us to need help
and support in navigating through them
the more we slowly inch our way towards
that secure world view where we're able
to recognize I can ask for help there is
no reason why someone else should get
help and not me I need comfort and
support and Care from other people there
is no reason why I should not have those
things even though everyone else should
now I want to be clear that doesn't mean
that any one particular person owes you
endless care love support and attention
but it means that it would be a
reasonable thing for you to do at some
point along the line to build out a
social support network in which you're
able to give and receive support and
comfort around everyday concerns and
everyday stressors both the abnormally
big ones and the smaller ones that you
might currently deem kind of
insignificant now let's drop it down a
level let's say you aren't able to have
that moment with yourself at the point
where that need for Comfort comes online
and you do find yourself getting a bit
dysregulated can you instead of shaming
yourself for being lazy and not directly
tackling the problem in this moment
notice and accept oh I'm feeling
dysregulated my system is just out of
whack today I feel grumpy I feel anxious
I feel angry I am not arriving in this
moment with the presence that I need to
tackle this task and solve my problem
and can you ask yourself the question
what is it that I need do I need comfort
do I need help do I need support do I
need rest and is it possible to give
that to myself
instead of denying that I have needs
instead of denying that this has an
impact on me instead of pulling back and
trying to isolate myself from everybody
or trying to get Comfort out of people
without directly asking for it can I
take a minute and just recognize I am
feeling off today can I attend to my
feeling State instead of trying to fight
the uphill battle of attempting to solve
this problem when I am not in a state to
solve it
and in the way that I'm tending to my
feeling State can I make sure that I'm
not creating new problems for myself so
can I be a little bit mindful in this
moment of which coping mechanisms I can
turn to that are actually going to help
me get closer to the solution of this
problem rather than further away from it
can I give myself compassion and
self-understanding and use that
compassion and self-understanding to
start spiraling upwards towards the
secure response so the goal here is
lessening the resistance we feel to our
own dysregulation and procrastination
and accepting that when those things are
happening for us it's usually because
our systems have a deeper need that
they're trying to get met and if we can
meet that need in an Adaptive way then
we're going to experience an increased
sense of Regulation which pretty much
always makes problem solving a lot
easier now I want to drop it down One
More Level let's say you've already
arrived at the place and this is
probably where most of us are starting
from if you have a history of complex
PTSD where the problems have
significantly worsened and you have this
sense of normal people do not let X Y or
Z problem get this bad and toxic shame
is kind of creeping into the corners of
your worldview can you in that moment
when thinking about that problem take
the time to explain to yourself gently
and in a non-shaming way why you are
having that problem
what sequence of events led you to this
point in your life where it's possible
that you have such a problem that an
intelligent worthwhile person like
yourself
has not yet found a way to solve is this
because you don't know how to ask for
the help or resource you need to solve
this problem is it because you feel too
much shame to access the help or
resource that you need to solve this
problem is it because you don't know how
to regulate yourself enough to solve
this problem is it because you developed
a Redemption fantasy as a child in order
to survive a terrible childhood in which
reality was not doing you any favors
when it comes to staying sane and now
you're having trouble letting go of that
Redemption fantasy so instead of dealing
with these problems you're dissociating
into some sort of fantasy where they're
all fixed none of those things are
inherently shameful they're all normal
responses to having had a difficult life
and it might be helpful to remind
yourself at this point that you are
definitely not the only person in the
world who has had the problem that you
currently have and the reason why other
people in the world have had this
problem is because this problem is the
natural outcome of a certain sequence of
events that happen to those people and
that also happen to you now that doesn't
mean it was an identical sequence of
events but it means that two have
arrived at the place where you have
arrived at a certain number of things
had to have happened and a certain
sequence of events happened to a lot of
other people as well that ended them up
with the same problem as you and
sometimes if I'm at that point where my
problems are very bad I like to do a
loving kindness meditation where I just
take a moment and Center myself and draw
into my awareness
all of the people in the world who have
this problem or a similar problem and
see if I can breathe in an awareness of
that and breathe out a sense of
compassion for all of us you are
definitely not the first person to have
the level of financial challenge that
you have or the level of relationship
challenges that you have or the level of
mental health challenges you have there
are so many other people in the world
with very bad problems and those
problems did not happen to them because
they are corrupt bad worthless human
beings those problems happen to them
because a sequence of events led them
there
and if you can take a moment to have
compassion not just for yourself but to
feel a sense of connectedness to
everybody who has that problem and
whoever will have that problem you can
give yourself a moment of reminder that
you are not alone and it is not
inherently shameful to have really bad
really intense problems that you don't
know how to solve other people have that
experience as well most people with
complex PTSD have that experience right
now in this exact moment
and you might want to even take a moment
right now
to pause
and draw your awareness to that
how many people out there at this exact
moment are probably struggling with
toxic shame complex PTSD symptoms
relational difficulties attachment
issues the world is full of those people
and it was not any of their faults that
they developed those problems and it's
not yours however what you do with it is
up to you you get to choose the way that
you internally represent the problems
you have
and the more compassion you're able to
have for them in any given moment the
closer you're getting to being realistic
about how to solve them at the end of
the day the thing that is going to keep
you the most stuck if you have toxic
shame is the belief that the reason you
have larger than average problems is
because you are broken and shameful and
there's something wrong with you that is
not true of you it is not true of
anybody and you are not the exception to
that rule nobody chooses a life filled
with complex problems and an inability
to regulate around them not a person on
Earth would choose that you are not the
exception and the way to reverse
engineer this entire downward spiral and
get to a place where you're able to
function at least in a given moment like
a secure person is to start treating
yourself with self-understanding and
compassion in the places where you have
once only had toxic shame and when that
toxic shame arrives and when it takes
over the system it can feel incredibly
overwhelmed coming it can feel
paralyzing it can feel disorienting it
can feel impossible to cope with however
there is a line I love that goes feeling
shame does not mean you are shameful and
in those instances where the toxic shame
is present and it feels really intense
what I want to challenge you to do is
can you have that feeling in your body
can you recognize it can you name it as
shame this is Shame Shame Shame I'm
feeling shame and then at some point in
that process can you draw your awareness
to the fact that shame is a feeling it
is not a truth about who you are or
about your character or about the core
of you shame is just a feeling and if
you can learn to have compassion for
yourself in that moment when the shame
is in your body and have empathy for
yourself as a person who is experiencing
toxic shame
even for just a moment you're going to
be able to start climbing your way out
of this compassion allows toxic shame to
start lessening because you realize your
problems are not personal
they are a natural consequence of the
life that you have led and the
circumstances that you've been through
and the coping mechanisms that you
developed as a result the less personal
your problems feel the less dysregulated
you're going to be every time you think
about them
the less dysregulated you are when
you're thinking about your problems the
more realistic of a handle you start to
get on what it's going to take to fix
those problems as well as what type of
support you're going to need emotionally
in the process of fixing them getting a
realistic handle on what it's going to
take to fix your problems as well as
what type of emotional support you're
going to need in the process allows you
to start sourcing the actual Solutions
and actual support and actual help that
you need to start solving the Practical
problems in your life
and the more the Practical problems in
your life start getting solved the more
regulated you become overall because you
start developing a safer and more secure
life for yourself
and the safer and more secure and more
well-regulated your life is the more
relaxed and the less overwhelmed you're
going to feel
the more relaxed and the less
overwhelmed you feel the more your
system is naturally going to be able to
relate calmly to other people because
you aren't chronically in a state of
dysregulation that affects your
relationships and the more you're able
to calmly form relationships with other
people the more support and the more
comfort you both give and receive and
the greater a sense of belonging and
Community you experience and the more
you have a sense of belonging community
and resource the more you are now
working your way into secure territory
and the more you work your way into
secure territory the more you're able to
recognize when life gets stressful what
you need and how to solve your problems
holistically
now of course this is an incredibly long
process however any time you're able to
stop in a moment where you would have
once berated yourself and blamed
yourself as a morally flawed human being
for the problem that you're having
and you're instead able to choose
self-understanding
self-compassion and proper
contextualization of the problem every
single one of those moments even if you
can only do it 1 25th of the time gets
you one step closer to that eventual
place where you are secure and resourced
it is a long journey I'm not going to
pretend it's easy but the good news is
you don't have to do it perfectly
a secure life and a secure attachment
system gets built through a series of
moments in which for even one minute you
are able to show up with compassion in a
place where you could once only show up
with shame and self-hate over the course
of a lifetime those minutes of
self-compassion and self-understanding
add up to a life where eventually the
balance starts tipping in the favor of
self-love and once the balance has
tipped in that favor you're going to
find that upward spiral starts happening
on its own alright that's all I have to
say for today on that cycle of toxic
shame procrastination and how we can
start giving ourselves compassion in
those moments to start breaking the
cycle at any point as always let me know
what's coming up for you guys as you go
through this video I love you I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]
thank you