hey guys Heidi prep here welcome back to
my Channel today we are talking about
the term emotional dumping so I think
that this is a super important term to
be familiar with if you are doing any
sort of healing work because the
difference between emotional dumping and
emotional sharing is the difference
between the type of connections that
keep you stuck in patterns of rumination
and have never really resolving your
core issues versus the type of
connections that allow you to actually
get at the root of what the challenge is
and to help you resolve things from the
core so I first heard the term
emotionally dumping when I was going
through this period of looking for a lot
of online support groups for attachment
healing work and there was one group I
came across that had the rule no
emotional dumping and I was like oh it's
interesting what does that term mean and
it turned out what that term means is if
you are seeking support in this specific
group what you're not today do is call
someone up and just tell them all about
the situation without it all referencing
your own experience or what you're
feeling or how this relates to your
healing and Recovery work
and I would contrast this to other
groups where it seemed like all anyone
was doing was ranting about other people
and staying really fixated on the
details of their scenarios without ever
really referencing what was going on for
them and I became hyper aware of what it
looks like when someone is sharing
versus dumping and what's really
interesting is I started noticing that
the group where people were not allowed
to emotionally dump was a group where
people started actually getting better
but a lot of people don't know the
difference between emotional dumping and
emotional sharing and they think that
what they're doing is sharing when
actually what they're doing is dumping
and I'm going to go right into what the
difference between those two things is
so emotional dumping is the process of
Outsourcing our ego functioning and I'll
explain what that means so when you are
a child the first thing you do to figure
out what different experiences are like
in life is you look at how your parents
or caregivers are reacting to different
experiences right so when we're children
we don't really know what is considered
universally good and what's considered
universally bad and of course as adults
we know that those terms are very
nuanced but an easy example of this is
when you are learning to walk and you
take your first couple of steps then
fall down the first thing children tend
to do is look at their parents and go is
my mom clapping and happy for me because
I tried or is she distressed and freaked
out because I fell down and how the
parent responds to you becomes your
internalization of what that experience
is right most of the time when children
have a slight fall and they're not hurt
their parent looks at them and goes it's
okay and then the child learns oh it's
okay to fall and they get back up and
they try again and there are a series of
moments over our entire lives where we
do this right we learn to social
reference and take cues from how other
people are responding to the situation
we are in to figure out how we should be
feeling about the situation that we are
in now there's nothing wrong with this
it's perfectly normal but by the time we
become adults we are meant to have
developed our own ego functioning so
when we are children we don't know how
to make sense of our own experiences so
we look to our parents to provide
meaning to them and when we are adults
we are expected to be able to make sense
of our own meaning so we no longer as 20
30 40 50 60 year old adults need to be
looking to other people to help us make
sense of what's happening for us and
help us understand how we're feeling
internally but when we are emotionally
dumping this is exactly what we're doing
so emotional dumping is the process of
bringing a situation to someone else
telling them all of the facts about the
situation without telling them directly
how you feel and expecting them to help
you determine how you feel by giving you
their reaction so an example of this
might be having a fight with your
partner going to a friend and going can
you believe what my partner said and
listing 10 different things they said
listing 10 different things they did
giving an entire laundry list of all of
the ways your partner has behaved and
then looking at your friend expectantly
and waiting for them to react the way
that you want them to react to confirm
the way that you are feeling this is
emotional dumping because you have left
your own experience out of the equation
whether you noticed it or not whenever
you go to someone else and you're
feeling a certain way and you're trying
to tell a story to get them to infer the
way you're feeling and mirror it back to
you without you telling them directly
what you're feeling what you are doing
is outsourcing that ego function it's
like you being a one-year-old child who
is learning to walk you fall down you
look to your parent you having a fight
with your partner bringing it to a
friend giving them all the facts and
then looking at them expectantly is the
exact same thing as looking at your
parent as a one-year-old child you are
asking your friend to tell you how you
feel and usually you are doing this with
some sort of motivation right there's a
certain feeling you're trying to elicit
from your friend based on the way that
you presented the facts so you could go
in and tell the exact same story with
the exact same facts but if you were to
balance those facts out with things like
your contribution to the argument or the
fact that your partner was stressed or
the fact that you know that they're not
really great at communicating in this
particular way your friend would
probably give you a totally different
reaction it would be a lot more balanced
and it would be more along the lines of
it sounds like you guys are going
through some challenges but it also
sounds like you have a pretty good idea
of what it's going to take to find
agreement and work it out now in both
cases it would still be emotionally
dumping because you are still asking
your friend or the other person to
provide the emotion related to all the
facts that you have brought to them
however this is just going to show that
whatever facts we bring to someone are
almost always a one-sided story right
and presenting a one-sided story then
asking for feedback is not really asking
for True feedback it's just an attempt
to not own your own emotional experience
right because if you bring a biased
story to your friend and they have a
strong emotional reaction to it now you
feel validated in the emotional reaction
that you're having internally without
having to communicate that emotional
reaction you're having internally and
that feels pretty safe most of the time
because now you know when you go ahead
and display that emotional reaction
because your friend has already had it
on your behalf you're probably not going
to get rejected you're probably not
going to be met with whoa you're
overreacting right and this is a very
common trap that often anxiously
attached individuals fall into or those
on the anxious attachment Spectrum but
the opposite of this is emotional
disclosure and emotional sharing
emotional sharing is riskier than
emotional dumping and the reason it's
riskier is because when you are
authentically sharing your emotional
experience you are putting yourself out
there to have it be challenged or
rejected or misunderstood however you
are also allowing yourself the
opportunity to get feedback that might
actually help you get out of these Loops
if you are for example chronically
having problems with your partner but
you are always sharing one-sided stories
that are more akin to emotional dumping
than actual sharing you're never going
to get feedback that helps you grow you
are only going to get feedback that
re-confirms and strengthens the feelings
you already have which means you stay
stuck in the same Cycles but when you
take the time to get in touch with your
own emotional experience
to really Center yourself and figure out
okay how am I feeling about these fights
with my partner not what is my partner
doing not what is the laundry list of
things that they are messing up that I
can communicate to someone else how do I
feel in this relationship
am I feeling lonely am I feeling
unfulfilled am I feeling
uncertain about the future of this
relationship
and if I can go to a friend or a family
member or a therapist or loved one and
bring those feelings to the table
and talk about those feelings probably
going to get a lot further because now I
have an internal locus of control right
I'm not focused on the other I'm focused
on my experience on what it's like to be
me inside of this relationship or inside
of this situation and so if you want to
start practicing this skill there are a
couple of things I recommend the first
thing is to notice when you're emotional
dumping especially if you err on the
side of anxious or fearful avoidant
attachment you're very likely to be
doing this without even realizing you're
doing it so signs that you might be
doing it that you can tip yourself off
to are one you're thinking of how to
present a story in a way that will prove
your point so when you are going to
bring a situation in your relationship
to a friend or a loved one you're
thinking about how you are going to
present the facts in such a way that the
other person will understand how you're
feeling and the antidote to this is to
actually challenge yourself if you can
to give no facts so to go into a
conversation with whoever it is you're
looking for support from and only talk
about your experience and your emotional
state so don't tell them my partner
didn't answer my text message for two
days don't tell them my partner is
making snarky comments towards me tell
them I am feeling like I'm not getting
enough Connection in my relationship and
I feel kind of sad about that and a
little bit hopeless and scared because a
part of me really wants this
relationship to continue I really care
about this person but a part of me knows
that there are needs I have that I'm not
sure I can get met in this relationship
and I need to sit with those conflicting
feelings or maybe talk them out a little
bit and figure out more fully how I feel
where my center of gravity is and what I
want to do about the situation are you
available to talk to me about that right
that's a completely different
conversation then can you believe my
partner did X Y and Z they need to
change their they're narcissist
they don't care about anyone except
themselves right that conversation
doesn't really get at the root of the
problem which is the way that you're
experiencing the situation and what your
options are going forward and I also
want to talk about what it feels like to
be on the receiving end of someone's
emotional dumping so I remember having
this conversation one time with a close
friend
um it was over text so it was kind of
happening over a series of hours and I
kept asking him how he was feeling about
a certain issue he was having in his
relationship and he would only respond
to me with facts about how his partner
was feeling so he would go okay I think
he's not mad at me anymore I think when
I walked into the living room this
morning he didn't seem as upset so I
think we're good and I kept having to be
like but how are you feeling right I'm
not in a relationship with your partner
I'm not all that concerned about how
your partner is feeling this morning but
I'm very concerned with how you're
feeling because you're my friend and I
love you and I care about you and it was
very difficult to get a straight answer
out of him about his own emotional
experience because in his mind his
emotional experience was the direct
result of what his partner was doing
right so he assumed that by telling me
what his partner was doing I was going
to be able to figure out what emotional
experience he was having and in reality
I had no idea right some people are
happy when their partners are mad at
them because maybe they're unhappy in
the relationship and they want the other
person to want out as badly as they do
some people are sad when their partners
are mad at them some people are angry
right back right so when you're in a
situation where someone is telling you
all of these facts about a situation and
you're getting the idea that they kind
of want you to react in a certain way
some phrases that might be helpful are
hey I'm not actually all that concerned
about what's going on with other people
in this situation but I care about you
and I'm curious about what's going on
for you would you tell me a little bit
more about how you're feeling or
figuring out and sometimes this takes a
little bit of pause and detective work
to figure out which things someone else
has paired in their own mind so in
another situation I was having a
conversation with an acquaintance where
she was telling me about how she
couldn't do X Y or Z she couldn't set
these boundaries because her roommate
would be angry at her and I was very
confused about that because in my head
if you set boundaries and someone is
angry with you sometimes that just
happens right sometimes people don't
like our boundaries and they don't like
the things that we need to keep
ourselves okay and as long as those
boundaries are reasonable and not
actively infringing upon or hurting
another person sometimes tolerating the
discomfort of someone being angry at us
is just a natural consequence of setting
boundaries right but it occurred to me
that in this person's mind there was
this rule that people can't be angry at
you probably because she had never
learned to sit with and digest the
feelings of discomfort that came along
with not being liked or not being
thought kindly of so the conversation
had to go in a different direction and
instead of trying to figure out like how
to manipulate the roommate to do these
things without her asking your set of
boundary I realized the question I had
to ask was how can I support you through
the discomfort that you might feel if
you set a boundary how can I be present
with you as you tolerate the feeling of
someone else being angry at you it
sounds like you really struggle with
that feeling and I must note this is in
and of itself doing the ego functioning
for someone else right however it's
doing it in a way that is a lot more
productive than is giving them whatever
reaction you sense they want you to have
so that their worldview is validated
without them telling you what their
worldview is so there are ways to
approach this as both the person doing
the emotional dumping as well as the
person who's being emotionally dumped on
if you are being emotionally dumped on
you're going to want it as much as
possible completely avoid commenting
whatsoever on the story Stories the
person is telling you about other people
and just stay focused on the person in
front of you instead of saying oh my God
how dare he say how did you feel when he
said that right try to get their
personal experience
their body State their emotional state
to be the focus of the conversation so
that you don't go in circles and you
never end up talking about something
real right and if you're the person
doing the emotional dumping your job is
to try to catch yourself notice if
there's a feeling you're trying to
elicit in someone else and instead bring
that feeling back into yourself that's
probably the feeling you have right if
you want your friend to be furious at
your partner it's probably because you
are furious at your partner right and
there's probably also something beyond
that some sort of very vulnerable
feeling and if you can share that that
anger or that vulnerability and own it
in your processing now you're
emotionally sharing because you are
doing the work that your parents once
did for you when you were one-year-old
of figuring out how you feel about a
situation deciding for yourself is this
good or bad for me and then you are
telling someone else how you're feeling
and that allows you to authentically
connect to them rather than inviting
them into a psychodrama in which you are
one of the main characters but which
never properly gets resolved and I
personally think that it's actually
unkind to continuously emotionally dump
onto other people without taking the
opportunity to First figure out how
we're feeling and communicate that to
them because we are wasting their time
we are asking them to play parent or
psychologist for us and chances are if
we're emotionally dumping we're probably
not really looking to solve the problem
we're probably just looking for
validation or confirmation that the way
we feel is the right way to feel but as
adults we know there is no right way to
feel right if we are looking for
justification that we're feeling the
right way we are probably just stuck in
the drama triangle which is a model that
I have some videos on that I will link
in the description of this video and we
are not actually trying to make change
or better our situation or find the
lessons in it right and if we're going
to be taking up someone else's time why
not do it in a way that actually allows
us both to learn something from it right
unless and I truly say this
non-sarcastically unless you literally
just love drama there have been times in
my life where I have just loved drama
like I remember in my mid-20s I went
through this phase where I knew like I
didn't want to be serious or focused on
the real issues in my life and so I went
and involved myself in as much
interpersonal drama as I could find and
then I would go to other friends and
like tell them all these dramatic
stories and be like I'm doing this I'm
engaging with all of this because I love
drama I don't want to think about my
real problems right now I want my life
to feel like a TV show and at least if
we're owning that other people are not
putting like real energy and resources
into trying to fix what they think are
problems when what they really are is
dramatic distractions right so at the
least at the least to be clear about
whether or not the thing that you're
dumping about is truly just drama in
which case advise your friend to go get
some popcorn before conversation but if
you actually want to heal and grow and
get to the root of your problems and
start figuring out true Pathways forward
try to stay as far as you possibly can
from emotional dumping by staying
centered in your experience figuring out
what you're feeling and communicating as
much of that as possible while leaving
out as much of the dramatic details as
possible when you go to share your
feelings with other people
all right let me know in the comments
what your thoughts feelings responses
reactions to this are are there times
where you realize that you have been
emotionally dumping when you thought you
were sharing or vice versa let me know
whatever is coming up for you guys and
as always I love you I hope you are
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again super
soon
foreign
[Music]