hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
today on this channel we're talking
about the concept of emotional neglect
and this is a topic that I personally
feel very passionately about bringing
into the conversations that we have
around attachment healing around trauma
healing around essentially any form of
early Developmental wounding and the
reason why I think it's so important to
highlight this topic is because it's one
that very frequently gets missed so I
think it's very common for people to
start watching videos or reading content
or in any way exposing themselves to
information about trauma or attachment
Styles or whatever it is and go yeah I
see myself in the symptoms of these
things but there's nothing I can point
to in my childhood that was overtly
traumatic there's nothing that happened
to me that I can really look at and go
yeah that's the reason why I have all of
these challenges very often and when we
talk about these topics we're looking
quite directly at what did happen in our
childhoods but we also have to pay
attention to what didn't happen when we
were young in order to make sense of how
our cognition and our emotional World
developed as adults so when we look at
things like depression and anxiety PTSD
cptsd addiction insecure attachment
emotional regulation problems
essentially all of these really big
topics that get covered in psychology we
can see links to emotional neglect to
all of them which is not to say that all
of these things are always caused by
emotional neglect but that at least a
subset of all of these issues can and
has reliably through research been
linked to emotional neglect so emotional
neglect can be at the core of all of the
above however realizing that you've been
emotionally neglected is a very
challenging thing to do so what we're
going to go over in this video is what
actually happens when when we experience
early emotional neglect how that shapes
or fails to shape our emotional World in
a way that can lead to a lot of
challenges later in life so essentially
the core of what we're looking at here
is how emotional neglect leads to a
disconnect between our subjective world
so our inner world of thoughts and
feelings and the outer more objective
world so the world of people places and
things in a nutshell what didn't happen
if we experienced early emotional
neglect is we were not taught to make
proper sense of the relationship between
our inner world and the outer world so
whereas trauma disrupts our systems of
meaning making emotional neglect can
interfere with our ability to form
systems of meaning and to form coherent
understandings of how the world works
and what information it's important for
us to be paying attention to and
emotionally investing ourselves in I
remember seeing this joke on Twitter one
time where someone was explaining what
it's like as someone someone with cptsd
to listen to someone with PTSD speaking
and it went something along the lines of
person with PTSD I just can't stop
thinking about what my life was like
before the trauma me a person with cptsd
wait there was a before for you and
obviously this is a joke but what it
highlights here is that while single
instance trauma disrupts our ability to
understand the world coherently complex
trauma which can be the result of
earlier emotional neglect interrupts our
ability to form a coherent worldview in
the first place so I remember really
starting to draw my attention to the
idea of emotional neglect when I was at
a workshop where there was a speaker
talking about how she had experienced
Trauma from early emotional neglect and
something she said that I never forgot
was she spoke about a member of her
immediate family dying when she was a
child and she said nobody made that
experience matter
and those words really stuck with me the
idea of making an experience matter felt
so forward to me but also made total
sense when we are children a lot of how
we learn about emotional regulation is
through social referencing so something
happens that maybe shocks or scares us
maybe we're watching a scary movie and
we look around and we kind of check is
everybody else freaked out or are my
caregivers looking calm and then we
learn how how to with increasing
complexity categorize our own inner
experiences based on how the people
around us are responding to the same
stimuli so if I feel really scared and
then I look around and notice everyone
else is just chatting and eating popcorn
I'm going to learn something along the
lines of when something scary happens
but it's on the TV I'm probably safe now
this is a very simple example but when
we have social referencing in our
environment that does not properly map
on to our inner states this gets very
confusing so let's say you have a member
of your immediate family die but you
exist inside of a family Dynamic that's
quite avoidant so even though the
members of your family might be feeling
intense grief and loss they might not be
displaying those things and so then when
you're looking around and trying to kind
of socially reference what's going on I
feel this deep sense of grief and loss
but everyone else looks kind of calm or
is making jokes or isn't really paying
attention to what happened what we might
internalize is this feeling of grief or
intense loss that I feel is the wrong
thing to feel because it doesn't match
what I'm seeing from my environment so
in a healthy caregiving environment it
is the role of the parent or caregiver
to see the child's inner world and to
help them associate their inner emotions
to what's happening in their environment
you feel grief you feel sadness you feel
loss those are normal responses to
someone you love passing away it's a
very simple example that's very clear to
most of us but this can also happen on a
very subtle level all of the time maybe
a child had a difficult interaction at
school but when they tell their parent
about it they don't seem to have any
significant reaction so the child
figures okay maybe my feelings were hurt
when this person said something to me
about how I look or how I act but I must
just be too sensitive or it must be
wrong for me to have this response of
upset and then what happens is we start
to develop shame bound emotions so I do
have an entire video just on this that
I'll link in the description of this
video but essentially what happens when
our emotions become shame bound is we
start to believe that there are things
we can feel that are wrong and that we
ought not to feel and this can lead to a
whole host of emotional disregulation
issues when we believe that the emotions
we are feeling are not connected in a
way that makes sense to our external
environment so we're going to get into
some of the things you might struggle
with as an adult if you experienced
emotional neglect in childhood but
before we do that I just want to quickly
go over once again why emotions are so
important to focus on and develop
vocabulary around as children because
there's often this kind of narrative out
out there that if you just toughen up
and ignore your emotions you're going to
have an easier life and that absolutely
could not be further from the truth
emotions are incredibly important pieces
of information about what is happening
in our environment and how our body is
responding to what is happening so what
matters to us in life and what we ought
to be paying attention to if we ignore
this we are robbing ourselves of the
ability to make good decisions to stay
Al igned with what matters to us in life
and we are also likely to be missing
very significant pieces of information
that are necessary for processing the
world in a logical and coherent way
another tweet I saw one time that I
really liked was comparing emotional
sensitivity to intuitive eating so in
the philosophy of intuitive eating it's
all about paying attention to your
body's cues and giving your body
whatever food it wants whenever it wants
it and the argument against intuitive
eating is often well if I did that I
would just eat pizza all the time but
the argument this tweet was making was
that that is actually not intuitive
eating because your body is very rarely
craving super unhealthy Foods if you're
actually attuned to your body and you're
listening not just to its cravings for
sugar and things like that but also
paying attention to what foods make your
energy low what foods are harder to
digest which foods are easiest on your
system you're actually probably going to
be eating pretty healthily at the end of
the day because you're not just paying
attention to the super strong overt cues
that your mind is giving you about what
it wants to eat you're actually really
Associated to your entire system and
you're looking at how everything you put
in your body impacts the way that you
feel and the same is true for emotional
Attunement so when I hear people say
things like if I were to pay more
attention to my emotions I would just be
a rational and I would never get out of
bed in the morning I would become this
lazy slob whatever it is that they fear
placing additional attention on their
emotions would lead to to be attuned to
our emotional systems does not mean only
listening to the part of ourselves
that's telling us to stay in bed all day
and be a slob it means also listening to
the emotions that tell us hey I want to
feel good and proud of myself so it's
time for me to enact some discipline or
to do some hard work to get myself to
where I want to go those types of
signals are also signals that our
emotional systems give us when we are
accurately attuned to them our bodies do
not want us to wither away in bed our
bodies want us to get up and live but we
have to be properly attuned to our
bodies and to our emotions in order to
get the whole picture in our minds so
what we're going to look at now is some
of the ways we might struggle as adults
if we had early experiences of emotional
neglect and then after that we're going
to look at what we can start doing to to
reverse this process and to become more
attuned to and sensitive towards our
emotional experience so the number one
thing that I think can be really
challenging for people who had early
emotional neglect is making decisions on
both a large scale and a small scale our
emotions are there to draw our attention
to what matters most to us in life if we
have learned to dissociate from our
emotions and tell ourselves it's not
important to pay attention to them what
we are going to find is that it's really
difficult for us to feel as though our
lives have a deep sense of meaning
because maybe we'll end up following all
of these formulas that are set out by
other people or by Society for what
leads to a good life without ever really
checking in on does this fit for me do I
feel aligned with these things is this
what I want out of my life and then we
might end up feeling really depressed
when we achieve all of these milestones
and can't understand why we aren't happy
or this could go in another Direction
which can be that we are so disconnected
from what makes us feel a certain way
that we can get extremely neurotic about
even the tiniest of decisions in our
lives so we can spend hours obsessing
over what am I going to eat for dinner
tonight or which shirt should I wear to
this event because we don't really
understand the big things that give our
lives meaning what the guiding
principles of our lives and our
well-being are we can get super fixated
on the little tiny hits of dopamine that
we might be able to glean out of our
day-to-day life but at the end of the
day both of these scenarios leave us
feeling pretty empty inside which is
probably a big reason why early
emotional neglect tends to be associated
with depression and anxiety in adulthood
when we don't know what matters in life
when we don't have our emotions as
guiding principles telling us I care
about this I'm interested in this this
is an area where I feel as though my
inner world can make a positive impact
on my outer world we don't really know
how to make good decisions because again
we aren't attuned to the part of our s
that is giving us constant information
about that second thing that we
frequently see with emotional neglect
toxic shame so if you've been following
this channel for a while you have
probably seen some videos I've put out
on toxic shame and how it ties into
emotional
disregulation but if not I'm going to
link them in the description of this
video because toxic shame is inherently
this belief that something about me is
fundamentally broken flawed or wrong and
that if anyone got close enough to me
they would see that and the reason why
toxic shame often develops as a product
of emotional neglect is because children
experience shame when they put out bids
for connection and have them rejected or
when there is some sort of rupture that
goes unrepaired with their caregiver
shame is the emotion that comes online
to tell us what is likely to get us
rejected from our environment and so if
simply being ourselves and displaying
our emotions to our caregivers leads to
Chronic rejection we are going to feel
chronic shame which is going to bleed
into the belief there is something just
fundamentally wrong with me in that
belief the belief that the very core of
who I am is shameful and needs to be
hidden from others leads to a whole host
of other challenges some of which you
can check out in the videos I've linked
below some of which we're going to talk
about in the remainder of this one the
next thing that might happen as a
product of emotional neglect is
developing a phobia of inner experiences
so this is a term that I came across for
the first time in a book that I believe
I have behind
me in this book right here coping with
trauma related dissociation and I found
that this term really clicked some
things into place for me the idea of
having a phobia of inner experiences is
essentially the idea that there are
certain emotional states we have
absolutely no idea how to self-regulate
around so our body naturally tries to
redirect us from them anytime we get
close to them however once again all
emotions are really important as pieces
of information so if we have a phobia
around the experience of anger we're
going to be missing out on really
important pieces of information about
where we need to set boundaries maybe
when I was a child if I experienced
anger I got left alone and that
experience of anger was overwhelming I
had no idea how to downregulate from it
my system learned to lock away conscious
feelings of anger when they came up in
my mind so now maybe I automatically go
into a freeze response anytime I start
to experience anger in my body
if I don't know how to process sadness
maybe anytime my system begins to feel
that emotion of sadness because it
starts as a sensation in the body my
mind immediately finds something to
distract me with and all of a sudden I
don't know why I just can't pay
attention to what I was doing or what I
was thinking about and I need to be
online looking at something or
researching something that is changing
my emotional state I've flipped into a
flight response and this can go for any
emotion that we failed to learn to
regulate as children it can become a
kind of psychological no-o area in our
minds that we often need a lot of trauma
informed help to access and we're going
to talk more about what that looks like
in the latter part of this video the
next thing we might see as a product of
early emotional neglect is this sense of
what I call existential
loneliness so this idea not just that
there's nobody in my life right now who
sees and understands me which is kind of
how we perceive of loneliness in general
existential loneliness is this kind of
feeling that it's impossible for us to
be seen and known period because we
didn't have that early mirroring when we
needed it most and when we were
developing our sense of self so our
sense of self may have developed largely
in isolation and we might not have any
idea that it's possible for other people
to see and know us deeply and that might
be a very strong felt sense that we have
and to complicate this if we do not know
ourselves completely because there are
psychological no-go areas that we've
developed defensively through that
phobia of inner experience now it's
going to feel very true to us that we
can't properly be seen or known because
we do not properly see and know
ourselves in our entirety and other
people can only meet us as deeply as we
have met ourselves and I think that for
myself one of the most profound shifts
that has happened for me as I've been on
this journey of attachment work is going
from a sense of existential loneliness
to the Deep profound belief in my body
that I can be known by developing
intimacy first with myself and
uncovering all of those no-go areas in
my psyche it became possible for me to
communicate myself to other people in a
way that I once thought was absolutely
impossible it wasn't a conscious belief
I had it was just a feeling in my body
that feeling of deep existential
aloneness and this feeling can be
changed and it's one of the core reasons
why I'm so passionate about all of this
because the more literacy we gain around
ourselves and our own emotions the more
we learn how to connect with other
people and those connections are the
things that make our lives feel
meaningful and worth living so this
stuff is so important it's so important
to become aware of and to not dis Miss
inside of ourselves but before we go
through that process another problem we
might encounter if we've experienced
early emotional neglect is chronic
unconscious self-abandonment so if
you've been around this channel for a
while you've probably heard me talk
about self-abandonment so essentially
abandoning what we want for ourselves in
an authentic way in favor of staying in
connection with another person and there
are small instances where this isn't a
big deal right you want to get sushi
your friend wants to get Indian you for
Indian tonight but when we are doing
this chronically and unconsciously it
tends to be very alienating and the
reason why we will do this unconsciously
and chronically if we've had early
neglect is often because we have no idea
that we can bring our authentic selves
into connection we may have internalized
if we have that toxic shame belief the
only way to be in connection with others
is to figure out what they want and
present myself as though I want that to
or or to act as though I am this
absolutely perfect and ideal human being
so that they can find no fault with me
and it might not even occur to us that
there is such a thing as authentic
connection where we can be fully us and
another person can see the whole of us
so both what we're good at but also what
we're struggling with and what we don't
understand inside of ourselves and
another person can stay on the page with
us for all of that and that we can also
hold space for other people in that same
way
but again I really think that for a lot
of people who experienced early
emotional neglect and internalize that
belief that sharing any of my feelings
or inner world is going to lead to
rejection self-abandonment is not even
something we consciously think of it's
just something we automatically do it's
what we unconsciously believe is the
price we have to pay to get any form of
connection even if it's entirely
superficial and so this is another one
of those really deep Insidious beliefs
that can shift over time with direct and
targeted work on developing emotional
literacy on working on those toxic shame
beliefs and on learning to communicate
our inner worlds without an overwhelm of
Shame getting in the way sixth thing
that's very common with people who've
experienced emotional neglect is that
criticism hits incredibly hard and you
might feel highly highly defensive to
even the smallest hints from other
people that you're not doing something
perfectly to integrate feedback back
without having our defenses online we
need to know that we are being seen as
whole people by the people who are
giving us that feedback but if once
again we have never really learned to
share ourselves with people nobody is
going to be able to see us as whole
people because we haven't been able to
show them the full breadth of ourselves
so again if we have that belief I need
to behave perfectly in order to stay in
connection someone giving us any form of
negative feedback is probably going to
be processed by our system as you don't
want to be in connection with with me at
all and everything about me is wrong
when in reality someone might really
like 99% of us and just have one thing
that they want to chat with us about
because it's getting in the way of them
being able to connect with us properly
and the reason you might feel so
defensive when this happens is because
you're used to the cost of mistake being
really high if your only route to
connection when you were young was
behaving perfectly so your body might go
on high alert and start looking for any
way you can find to prove that person
that they are wrong about the criticism
that they're giving you because you
equate criticism with them writing you
off entirely so of course you're going
to push back against it and try to make
it not true instead of sitting with it
and integrating it which is something we
can only really do well if we have a
relatively secure attachment system so I
remember there was part of a support
group that I was in for a while and part
of the process within this group after
we'd spent some time building trust
together was to give each other feedback
both on what what our first impressions
of each other had been for better and
for worse as well as where people
thought we could be doing better so
where people perceived our areas for
growth to be and I remember sitting
there waiting for this circle to come
around to me absolutely terrified and
just thinking this is my worst nightmare
but then when it actually happened it
was very interesting because I'd gotten
to know the people in this group pretty
well they'd seen me in vulnerable States
and I'd seen them in vulnerable States
and so when they were giving me feedback
I had this sense of this is coming from
a place of care these people are
actually seeing me very clearly and
they're bringing into my awareness
opportunities for growth that I could
take but they're not using those
critiques to write me off as a person
they're using them to help me amarate my
own experience and that was the first
time I think I really got in my body
what it was like to receive criticism
that was actually very well intentioned
and that's not to say that I'd never
received well-intentioned criticism
before in my life just that this was the
first time my body really deeply logged
it as what was happening because there
was a high degree of interpersonal trust
and the idea that these people saw me as
a whole person built into the whole
dynamic and this is ideally the place we
want to get to as we work through that
early emotional neglect and we learn to
share ourselves more completely with
others criticism is going to start
looking less scary to us because we know
that people also see our strengths and
our vulnerabilities and so they're not
rejecting us on the whole when they give
us feedback in a lot of cases they're
actually trying to help but once again
this is the opposite of how we're going
to process this if we are dealing with
significant emotional neglect that we
have not yet started to work on and the
last thing we're going to look at here
is something you're likely to struggle
with if you had early emotional neglect
is that you have trouble with the
relationship between your subjective
inner world in the objective outer world
and understanding both how you impact
the world around you and how your
environment impacts you so there is a
field of psychology called object
relations that kind of harks back to
Freud and I just want to be clear that
that isn't specifically what I'm
referencing here though there might be
some overlap in what I'm saying what I'm
talking about here is that there's just
an inadequate amount of feedback between
our inner worlds and our outer worlds
because we haven't been taught how to
manage the connection between those two
things so if I'm feeling something
strong in my body but I don't see a very
obvious and overt reason in my external
environment why I might be feeling that
instead of getting really attuned to my
environment and trying to figure out
where might this be coming from what
subtle things might be kind of adding up
in the background of my life that are
culminating in this emotional experience
that I'm having and I'm going to really
examine the links between what's going
on in my outer world and what's going on
in my my inner world that's what we're
able to do when we're attuned to both
things when we're not attuned to those
things if we don't see a super overt
reason in our outer World why we're
maybe upset we're just going to go I'm
crazy there is no cause for my being
upset I'm just being my irrational self
again so that experience gets covered up
by shame and the information that
whatever feeling we were having is
trying to give us goes underground and
we don't process it or the opposite
could be true we could feel a super
strong emotion and just pick something
in our external world to blame it on and
to go well I'm feeling this so X Y or Z
must be happening someone must be
behaving maliciously towards me or
whatever it is because again we don't
have the inner and outer Attunement
skills to pick up on more subtle
Dynamics in our environment and how
subtleties impact our emotional in our
inner World in order to do that well we
have to have pretty good emot literacy
and we also have to have a pretty good
understanding of what events impact Us
in what ways so in my attachment healing
Journey there were multiple points where
I would be talking to someone who is
more securely attached than me and I
would hear them complain about something
and I would go I would never think to
complain about that thing to me that
thing is just a part of everyday life
you just ignore your feelings about it
and you get on with things but then I
would experience chronic emotional
disregulation
intermittent depression etc etc etc and
I had to start realizing that these
things other people are making into a
big deal might actually be these people
processing the emotions that they're
feeling at the volume that they're
feeling them at the time that they're
feeling them and that is what healthy
emotional expression looks like it means
being sensitized to and understanding
which things impact us emotionally and
in turn how we can take care of
ourselves and interact with our lives in
a way that maximizes our emotional
health and well-being and when we have a
very significant disconnect in this area
it can lead to things like delusions or
forms of schizophrenic thought patterns
and we're not going to go into that
today just because that is not my area
of specialty and I would not be able to
do it justice but in the kind of
moderate range we get things like for
example liance which is something we
talk a lot about on this channel so I
have this memory of years ago catching
up with a friend of mine who had been
dumped about a year prior by this girl
he'd been dating who he really liked and
I remember him talking about her as
though their breakup had happened like a
week ago and he was saying yeah I just
still have these really strong feelings
for her and I remember thinking well how
could you possibly have feelings for
this person you have not had any contact
with in a year because the person she is
now could be totally different than the
person she was a year ago and that
person is someone you don't have a
connection with but he didn't seem to
realize that his inner world was holding
on to the past and it's almost like it
wasn't updating fast enough it wasn't
taking the feedback from the outer World
which is that this person was no longer
in his life and adjusting his inner
World accordingly and this is on a large
or small scale what often happens to us
when we have significant impairments in
our emotional processing we aren't doing
enough checking between our inner and
outer world so when we have healthy
secure attachment systems what we're
frequently doing is sharing our inner
world with other people and getting
feedback on it and then that feedback
that we get from other people we then
use to update our inner world of
feelings and thoughts and perceptions
and this happens continuously in a
never-ending way for the entirety of our
lives but when we have learned that our
emotional world and our outer World
shouldn't or don't or can't interact in
a meaningful way we can experience
really big disconnects between how we're
feeling or we're thinking and making
sense of the world and the way that the
world actually is so when it comes to
Healing from emotional neglect what
we're trying to do is get to a place
where we are doing more Reality Checking
on a more frequent basis so where our
inner and outer world are interacting
with each other more frequently and in a
less distorted way so now we're going to
move into what it looks like to start to
heal from emotional neglect and what it
takes to start targeting these problems
at their core for healing from emotional
neglect can be an Insidious task because
the very thing that we need to heal from
it which is mentorship from our
environment is the very thing that
emotional neglect tends to tell us is
useless or impossible for us but healing
from emotional neglect is the process of
making our own feelings including our
own pain matter because we need those
feelings to navigate the world in a way
that makes sense
and we are probably going to need a lot
of help getting to the place where we
understand what value to give which
emotions so the first step in this
process is often increasing our
emotional literacy and this is something
that can be done to a large extent
through things like reading or watching
YouTube videos or listening to podcasts
and just developing more language for
what it is that we are feeling and for
which types of feelings tend to be
connected to which things in our
environment another thing we want to do
in this process is get better at self
Attunement so I do have a video about
this I will link in the description of
this one but when we are self attuning
essentially what we're doing is we're
learning to draw connections between
what we're feeling and what's happening
in the world outside of ourselves it's
kind of like keeping a food diary so
when I was learning about intuitive
eating I used to write down about 20
minutes after I ate anything how I was
feeling physically in my body to to
start drawing my awareness to eventual
patterns around which foods impacted my
energy levels in which ways and this is
something that I also recommend if
you're trying to get more emotionally
attuned pick points throughout the day
to sit down and routinely write out
what's going on for you at that point in
the day as well as how you're feeling
and I go over this process in much more
detail in that video on self atunement
so I recommend checking it out if this
is an area that is new to you but the
important thing here is that we are
learning to draw our awareness to what
it is that we're feeling and when and
why so we're learning to see our inner
world as connected to our external
environment in a way that might feel
somewhat unfamiliar to us the next thing
we're going to work on is practicing to
increase our tolerance level to all
emotions so it's highly likely if you
experienced early emotional neglect that
there are one or several feelings that
you do have either those shame binds or
those inner phobias of so for myself I
used to have an inner phobia around
anger and if I got too angry one of two
things would happen I would have a
chronic pain flare up that would totally
shut down my system for a couple of days
or I would experience an overwhelming
urge to get drunk and it wasn't until I
began working with a therapist who was
able to be present with me as I was
somatically experiencing anger and stay
on the page with me and help me learn
skills for both expressing and
downregulating that anger that those
instinctive body responses of pain or
addiction started to naturally disappear
so therapists particularly ones who have
a sematic element to the work that they
do can work as really great SPH holders
for us as we go into those experiences
and learn to tolerate staying present
with them so staying with them without
dissociating or without having that
flight response that takes us out of the
experience and the more that we learn to
tolerate those feelings that are most
afraid of the more we're able to
integrate them into our awareness which
helps us make better decisions across
the board and we might need to look for
different environments to hold different
types of emotions so when I was learning
to work with anger I worked with my
therapist but I also did a lot of work
with a community called radical honesty
that places a really big focus on
accessing and cleanly expressing anger
when I was learning skills for
tolerating intimacy I leaned heavily on
the community of authentic relating
which teaches staying present with
expressions of interpersonal intimacy
when I was working on staying present
with feelings of sexuality I lean on the
Tantra Community which helps us learn to
tolerate Sexual Energy in the body and
when I was learning to tolerate feelings
of pain and sadness I leaned heavily on
Buddhism where they would do teachings
on staying present with grief so what we
often need to do at this point in the
process is find environments where we
canot just cognitively think about which
emotion we need to integrate but where
we can actually get in touch with them
in the moment and somatically experience
them with the help of those who are
trained in containing these types of
emotions so this is about going out into
the world and finding the containing
environments that we needed when we were
young but did not get and once again
that emotional neglect patterning might
be telling us there's nothing out there
that's going to help me there's no one
out there who's going to be able to give
me the feedback I need and if I try or
put myself in any of these environments
and show these emotions I'm going to get
rejected and so that belief might be
something that we need to work through
first in order to even develop the nerve
to go out and put ourselves in these
situations where we can have firsthand
sematic experiences of those emotions
that we have been repressing so again
this process doesn't happen overnight
but hopefully we can lay out a bit of a
groundwork of what it can look like
overall so this is already bled into the
third thing we really want to place our
focus on in the healing process from
emotional neglect which is finding
mentors emotional neglect is in large
part an interpersonal wound which means
that the healing from it has to happen
in large part
interpersonally so we need to go out
into the world and deliberately search
for people who are embodying the
qualities that we know we are
emotionally deprived in and finding ways
to seek out mentors who can help us grow
in those areas I remember having a
conversation with a mentor of mine at
one point where she said you're used to
thinking of the environment around you
as an emotionally impoverished place so
you have stopped searching for ways in
which the opposite could be true and if
you're really serious about healing from
emotional neglect you have to believe
that there are ways in which your
environment can and will be able to
nourish your inner world and you have to
go out searching for them and that piece
of advice was one that hit home really
hard and that changed my life in very
big ways we have often cut ourselves off
from even the option of thinking about
the outer world as a place that could
provide us with accurate mirroring with
co-regulation with meaningful feedback
on our inner world and with really
enriching experiences that will change
our inner world for the better if we are
not used to interacting with it in a
wholehearted way and this all Builds on
itself because the more we get to know
ourselves and what our needs are the
more we're able to go out and find
mentors who very specifically can help
us fulfill those needs so those mentors
might be coaches they might be
therapists they might be community
members they might be friends but the
idea is that we just need to start
believing those people are out there
there are competent and compassionate
adults out there who have significant
nourishing things they could provide to
our lives and vice versa this might feel
completely counterintuitive and because
it's so counterintuitive to the way that
you think it's often what holds the key
to changing your worldview because at
the end of all of this we want to arrive
at a place where we believe that our
environments are places where we could
get nourishment from and that we could
give nourishment back to which leads us
to the final step which is living in a
state of constant give and take with our
environment and this is what it looks
like to have a secure connection to the
world we are allowing ourselves to go
into new situations and to meet people
from a place of wholeness and openness
so we're both receptive to what our
environments have to offer us and we are
also not withholding our own feelings
and our own perceptions and our own
inner worlds so there's a natural give
and take that we now have between our
subjective world and the objective world
around us so this requires self
atunement and once again getting to
really deeply know ourselves and
understand ourselves so that we get
clear on things like how to stay in
authentic connection with people in a
way that is boundaried and that protects
our inner world but also how to not
erect those boundaries so high that we
never have the chance for genuine
connection with other people this also
requires learning Attunement to other
people so learning to stay on the page
with people and get really curious about
their inner worlds and their experiences
and coming to understand how our inner
world and other people in our worlds are
different but can very significantly
enrich each others a kind of formal
practice that's helped me a lot with
this is the practice of circling so this
is kind of an interpersonal meditation
process that gets practiced in groups so
if you're curious about it you can go
online and try to find an online
circling group or there might be groups
that meet in the place that you live but
essentially this is all about engaging
in practices that allow you to stay in
authentic connection with other people
which opens up that continuous feedback
cycle between you and your environment
so that you're understanding how the
world is impacting you and how you can
impact the world and the more we do that
and the more we get attuned to the
relationship between subject and object
and how it is never not happening even
if we deny it the more we make sense of
ourselves and the more we find our place
in the world the more Our Lives become
meaningfully directed and the less chaos
and confusion we feel internally so
there are so many benefits to all of
this but it all starts with recognizing
that something like emotional neglect if
we have experienced it can lead to very
massive disturbances in the way that we
are processing the world and our inner
world as adults it's not a small thing
to have not received proper emotional
guidance and context for how to make
sense of our inner world so this has
been a lot of information and I'm going
to leave it at that for today but as
always anything that's coming up for you
guys as you go through this video please
leave in the comments section below I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again really
[Music]
soon