hey guys hedy preeb here today i'm
talking about a topic that i have meant
to make a video about for at least a
year now and have somehow never gotten
around to it because it's such a big
topic when it comes to attachment
healing and it's also something that a
lot of us don't have a name for and for
most of us this might be the first time
you're hearing this term i heard it for
the first time a year ago and was like i
don't understand how i've never come
across this term before it is so
relevant and what that term is is
limerence so i'm going to start by
reading you a definition of limerence
off the internet and then i'm going to
explain how i define it and what my kind
of operational definition of limerence
is going to be within this specific
video so the internet defines limerence
as a state of mind which results from
romantic or non-romantic feelings for
another person and typically includes
obsessive thoughts and fantasies as well
as a desire to form or maintain a
relationship with the object of love and
to have one's feelings reciprocated so
the first time that you read this
definition you might think so that is a
crush and in many ways it is actually
identical to a crush i think that many
definitions of the word crush could be
completely and totally interchanged with
the definition of the word limerence the
main difference there would be that
limerence has a bit of an obsessive
quality to it right but the way that i'm
going to define limerence specifically
is any relationship that you have where
you have those limerent feelings so
those feelings of wanting someone's time
attention of having mostly we're going
to talk about sexual and romantic
feelings for someone in this video but
and this is where i define limerence
versus a real desire to form a
relationship with someone limerence is
about when you are more attached to the
idea of someone that you have inside of
your head than you are to the actual
person so it's what happens when you
choose to prioritize
maintaining a fantasy relationship with
someone in your head over the real
relationship that you have with them in
real life which means you are willing to
get into fights with them about things
that they did that are not what you
wanted them to do or what the version
that you have of them in your head would
have done it means that you are
unwilling to learn new things about them
and integrate those things into your
idea of who they are because those
things might not go along with who you
want them to be it's basically any time
in which our idea of someone and what we
want to believe about them and the way
we want them to make us feel based on
that belief overrides our true genuine
willingness to have a connection with
that person and i think that for most
people who are insecurely attached
specifically those who are on the
anxious spectrum so either anxious or
fearful avoidant types it's possible
that most of the romantic and sexual
feelings you've had in your entire life
have been limerence and that you may
never have had a true genuine connection
with someone or you may have only had
that true genuine connection in moments
and the rest of the time there's this
constant push and pull between how you
want someone to be inside of your own
mind and how they actually are and you
might have always heavily prioritized
maintaining your image of who you want
this person to be in your head and we're
going to talk about why we do that as
well as how we can stop it because we
cannot form real connections with people
when we have limerence around them all
we're doing when we have limerence
around someone is kind of emotionally
masturbating to them right we're just
using this idea that we have of them to
make ourselves feel good about ourselves
and to confirm something we want to
believe is true about ourselves like if
this person loves me then i'm worthy and
we are doing that at the expense of
actually getting to know them so this is
not real connection this is not real
love this is not anything that gives us
real lasting power in a relationship so
it is my fairly firm opinion that love
and connection cannot happen until
limerence is at least operating at an
almost non-existent level real
connection can only happen with people
in real time okay but the first step of
getting over limerence is recognizing
when we're doing it and in order to
recognize when we're doing it we have to
learn to recognize kind of the danger
cues that happen inside of our own minds
and inside of our own bodies that alert
us to the fact that what we're feeling
is limerence not true connection so
let's talk about some of the things that
we might mistake limerence for one of
the biggest things i think we mistake
limerence for is sexual attraction so we
might think oh i'm just so attracted to
this person i can't get them off of my
mind i think about them wanting me i
think about us having sex i think about
us being together in a sexual way and we
might truly think that what we're
feeling is sexual desire and i think
that a lot of us of any attachment style
but particularly of insecure attachment
styles are actually not that grounded
when it comes to recognizing what sexual
attraction actually feels like in our
bodies okay so when we feel limerence
it's often a very mental thing so we're
fantasizing about someone we're thinking
about them we're almost like obsessively
watching a movie in our heads about what
we want that person to do and say and
feel towards us versus sexual attraction
is a very imminent feeling it's very
grounded in the body at least for myself
and i would imagine for other people as
well and something that i think we don't
talk a lot about because so few people
actually talk about sex in an embodied
way is that sexual attraction actually
requires us to feel a little bit calm
it's kind of this mix of having our body
be relaxed enough that we can feel
sexual urges because you can't feel
sexual when you're not feeling relaxed
because by virtue of being in
fight-or-flight mode all of those
lower-level systems are not being
prioritized by your nervous system so
the reproduction system is not the thing
that comes out screaming when you're in
fight-or-flight mode and when you are
insecurely attached when you are
engaging in a limerent redemption
fantasy as part of your attachment
system feeling threatened you are often
in fight or flight mode and fighter
flight mode is this very intense anxious
energy in the body it gives you a lot of
energy it gives you a lot of drive it
can make you feel like you want to go
for a run it can make you feel like you
want to reach out to people like you
want to send 25 text messages in a row
it can make you feel like you're
desperate to get some sort of answer
attention response from someone right
that is not the feeling of being relaxed
and present in your body and aware of
your sexual system right and obviously
there's excitation that happens when
you're feeling truly sexually aroused
but it's a very different feeling than
that kind of anxious heady desperate for
validation feeling right those two
feelings show up in different places in
the body so to recognize whether you're
feeling limerence or whether you're
feeling genuine sexual attraction you
really have to ground yourself in the
moment and notice what's coming up for
you so i had so many experiences in my
life where what i thought was that i was
so attracted to someone that i just
could not keep my head on straight but
actually what i was feeling was just an
overwhelming limerence for that person
so there was one person in particular
who i remember i met at a very difficult
period of my life where a lot of
was hitting the fan in a lot of
different directions and i developed
this out of control in my eyes
attraction to this person but what that
attraction felt like was this
overwhelming desire for them to want me
and i wanted them to want me so badly
that i would actually get a little bit
annoyed when i was with them because
they were not allowing me enough space
to engage with the fantasy version of
them that i had in my head so i ended up
sleeping with this person multiple times
and i would actually get anxious for the
sex to be over so that i could go back
to the part of my brain that was just
imagining them wanting me so badly that
was the best part to me and the reality
of being with them either sexually or
platonically was just kind of fodder for
the fantasy like it was like this
necessary evil that i had to do in order
to return to my fantasy and allow it to
deepen and so i was never fully in my
body when i was with this person and i
think that this is actually really
common i think that a lot of us i would
say most of us have learned to have sex
in a very disembodied way like we aren't
present with the experience we aren't
checking in with each other in a real
way we're often even fantasizing about
the person that we're with while we're
with them and completely ignoring the
actual version of them that is right in
front of us and i think that we have
been socialized to approach sex that way
a lot of the time but it is such a
disembodied experience right even
looking at someone while you're sleeping
with them and thinking oh you're so into
me right now that's a disembodied
experience right you don't know that for
sure maybe they're not into you at all
they just really wanted to have sex that
day because they were feeling horny
right you could be completely
misinterpreting why they're sleeping
with you the only experience you can
have in that moment that's true is your
own experience in your body right and
anytime we are having sex but we're not
focused on the actual feelings that are
present in our body in that moment we
are more focused on what the other
person is thinking of us we're generally
in limerence we are not genuinely in our
bodies experiencing attraction okay so
it's going to be a little bit different
for everybody like what limerence vs
genuine sexual attraction feels like
it's going to show up differently in
your body and in your mind but learning
what those distinguishing points are for
you is going to go a really long way in
helping you understand whether you feel
genuine attraction towards someone or
whether you feel limits towards them
another key one is that generally we
feel true embodied attraction towards
someone in the moment right so if you
are on your own thinking of this person
and you haven't had a lot of interaction
with them lately but you are still
feeling that intense overwhelming
feeling of attraction it might be
because you are experiencing limits
right so this also raises the question
well isn't limerence just a normal part
of being alive like when you have a
crush of course you think about that
person when they're not there even in
long-term romantic relationships you
think about your partner when they're
not there and you can have lots of warm
feelings you can draw upon memories and
that's fine there's nothing wrong with
that i'm not trying to moralize this
that might be a lie
i'm trying to moralize this a little bit
it felt untrue when i said that in my
body
but i think it becomes kind of
pathological and it becomes very
disruptive for ourselves and other
people when we're prioritizing the
fantasy that we have about someone over
the actual experience of being with them
and we're getting frustrated or
resentful towards them for not living up
to this fantasy version that we have of
them that is not real connection that is
not real love that is unkind towards the
other person it's not allowing them to
be seen and appreciated for who they
actually are as a human being which
leads me to my next point so we have to
understand the function of limerence in
order to get over it so until we
understand why we're doing this it's
going to be difficult for us to catch
ourselves in the moments that we're
doing it and decide to do something else
instead so limerence often feels like it
just kind of falls out of the sky right
like there's this book called living
with limerence by someone named dr l
who's unidentified and they talk about
how when you have a limerent object so a
crush that's kind of obsessive they have
almost this glow about them like you
think about them or you look at them and
you almost see them as like this
enlightened glowy uber attractive
version of someone right and it might
feel completely random and like it's not
your fault and it's completely out of
control how you feel about this person
but if you're paying close attention
there's usually a function to the
limerence itself okay and what i mean by
that is there is something your brain
needs that it is trying to fulfill
through this limerence object so i'm
going to give some examples from my own
life and also some that i think are
common examples of why people pick
limerent objects but i think that a
quicker way to do it for yourself is to
just really tune in to how your body
feels when you think about someone you
have limits around so i had an
experience recently where i was noticing
myself developing a bit of limerence
around someone who it didn't make any
sense for me to have this much of a
focus on our connection because we
didn't have that much of a connection it
was like someone i met briefly but i
really noticed that i wanted them to
fill this role of very knowledgeable
very together human being like that was
the way that i liked to think of them
and when i pictured this person in my
mind what i noticed first was that i
actually was not picturing us
interacting at eye level despite the
fact that any time i'd been around this
person we had been talking like normal
people who were right in front of each
other where i pictured them was kind of
up and to the right like i saw them
literally in my mind when i pictured
them as above me and i was like okay
that's interesting so when i have that
visualization of someone as above me
literally what does that feel like in my
body and i realized it makes me feel
kind of protected like it makes me feel
like knowing that there's someone wiser
more knowledgeable more capable than me
who i like to imagine as being in my
corner close by but not too close makes
me feel like i can kind of relax and
trust that they have the lead for a bit
and i like that feeling i like that
feeling of i don't have to think about
how to protect this other person which
is very often how i feel around other
people i often feel like i need to
protect the needs emotions and feelings
of the people around me that's kind of
this compulsive caretaking thing that i
have going on but i like sometimes
having a person where i meet them and i
believe them to be better or superior to
me in some way because i want to feel
for once like i'm getting taken care of
and this is where it's important to
point out this did not match my
experience of this person in reality
they were not offering to take care of
me there was no true reciprocal
relationship of care between us this was
not someone i even knew very well but i
liked the feeling that i got when i
imagined them as better than me i liked
the feeling of inferiority because it
allowed me to relax a little bit and so
that limits was serving the purpose of
alerting me to the fact that i'm feeling
a little bit overly responsible in my
life right now i'm feeling a little bit
like i want someone else to take the
lead in certain areas i want there to be
someone i can look up to for advice for
help for support and it feels very
mentally safe for me very physically and
mentally safe for me at this point in my
life to have a fake idea of someone in
my head where i believe that they know
better and that they are more
enlightened than me so i thought about
that and i took that person in the
mental image of my head and i just kind
of move them down here
like i move them into the area where i
picture people when i feel like i have
to be protective over them and i went oh
now it feels a bit scary i feel a little
bit of tension in my body i feel a
little bit of kind of anxious energy
flowing through my arms and my torso and
so now i'm aware that the limerence i
was feeling was protecting me from this
feeling protecting me from the feeling
of nobody really knows what they're
doing in life we are all the blind
leading the blind and that means that i
have to take extreme responsibility for
everything that i am learning for the
path that i'm walking down for the
choices that i'm making about how i
develop next this person isn't going to
make them for me even though i want so
badly to believe that if i just looked
up to them enough they would show me the
way i want that to be the solution but
it's not i have to find my own way i
think at other times in my own life i've
had limerence because i remember one
time i met someone who shared a really
bad habit that i had but they were so
proud of it and so confident in it and
they wore it like it was a virtue rather
than a literally life-destroying vice
and i wanted so badly to believe that
that habit for me could be a good thing
not a bad thing as well so i just
decided this person knows more than me
they're above me i will follow them down
this path and now anything that happens
as a result of that bad habit i don't
have to blame myself for i can blame
them right and that wouldn't be overt it
wouldn't be in my conscious awareness
but it would be absolutely present in my
unconscious awareness and there would be
times where i would resent that person
for it and not have the precise language
for why other times i've felt limerence
because i have wanted to be alone and
i've known that if i pick someone to
have limerence around and believe that
they are up on this pedestal that i
could never possibly reach then i don't
have to go through the process of
forming a real connection with this
person i can just consistently tell
myself i'm not good enough they're going
to reject me i can make that a
self-fulfilling prophecy because when
you're trying to impress someone you are
putting a giant wall between yourself
and them you are not allowing real
connection which means two people
showing up in real time sharing their
vulnerable authentic experience of being
alive and connecting on that that is the
only way real connection forms but when
you have someone up on a pedestal it
relieves you from the responsibility of
forming a real connection and it allows
you to get really caught up in this
fantasy of yourself as not good enough
but when you are good enough then you'll
have that connection and that fantasy
can actually be a very comfortable one
if you are afraid of being seen if you
have this fear which everyone who is
insecurely attached does necessarily
have that if someone saw the true you
they would not love you they would not
want to be around you they would not
accept you it feels very comfortable to
have concrete reasons in your head why
someone would reject you that are
superficial right so there's a point in
my past where i remember picking someone
and just deciding that the whole entire
problem the entire reason we didn't have
connection was because i was not fit
enough we had great conversations we
hung out all the time we enjoyed each
other's company but this person was not
attracted to me and they had made that
clear and i wanted to keep them in this
limerent position so i just decided it
was a physical problem it was not in my
mind anything to do with the fact that i
was completely not allowing them to be
vulnerable and authentic and honest with
me because i was so desperately trying
to shove them back into this place in my
head where they knew everything i was
like nah it's just like i'm not fit
enough so i can't have connection with
this person and that thought was way
more comfortable to me than i actually
could have connection with this person
but i would have to take a lot of
responsibility and show up in a very
different way and care about them
honestly and authentically even when it
hurts to care about them or it's hard to
care about them as opposed to staying in
this place where i'm more comfortable
where i just get to decide that oh poor
me they just don't like me back but i'm
so good at loving them no you are not
good at loving anybody who you have up
on a pedestal anyone you have on a
pedestal you do not have the opportunity
to have a real connection with but
sometimes we just want to feel good
about ourselves by putting ourselves in
that victim position and telling
ourselves i'm so kind so caring so
loving they just don't like me because
of this superficial reason and that
keeps us from recognizing the realer
reason which is that true connection
requires showing up as our adult selves
and actually being able to give as much
as we receive to another person and
accept that there are no inherent better
or worse people there are just different
people interacting with each other in
different ways and being more or less
willing to show up authentically now of
course there are different levels of
compatibility in terms of personalities
etc but i think that if you are honestly
and authentically showing up to your
connections there is very rarely if ever
going to be a situation where one of you
just absolutely loves the other person's
personality and the other person
absolutely dislikes the other one i
think that real connection is kind of
necessarily always matched because if
you feel super connected to someone but
they don't feel connected to you it's
almost definitely because you're
inventing something in your brain about
these qualities that this person has
that they actually don't have as opposed
to actually being present with them and
noticing and responding to what they are
giving you that is real okay because
those are the things that we can truly
connect on things that are real that we
can explicitly and overtly have moments
of bonding over with people so this
leads me to kind of my last point which
is more of the how to get over limerence
in the moment and this is a tool that i
took from radical honesty which is a
philosophy that i talk a lot about on
twitter but not as much about on here
but i will make some videos about it
because it has been revolutionary for me
at this current point in my life and it
can be extremely helpful with getting
over limerence so something that we talk
about a lot in radical honesty is not
hanging on to resentments towards people
so expressing resentments directly
towards people and there's a very
specific way that radical honesty
teaches people to do this so that we're
not being cruel and brutal in our
honesty but we're still able to express
it cleanly but something else that's
really interesting that radical honesty
teaches people not to do is to hang on
to appreciation for people so if you are
feeling very warm and happy and
appreciative towards someone in your
body radical honesty also encourages you
with the same level of urgency with
which you would feel resentment towards
someone to express your appreciation
towards them because if we hold on to
appreciation without directly expressing
it to someone what that can turn into is
an expectation for that person an
expectation on how we want them to
always behave because we so appreciate
something that they did in one moment
and then maybe we extrapolated upon it
in our brains and decided that they did
that because of this and so that means
in the future they're always going to do
that when i say this and then when we do
this and they don't say that we get
angry at them and then we don't express
that resentment and it becomes this
giant never-ending cycle of limerence
and people just not looking at each
other and having real moments of
connection but only looking at each
other and getting frustrated by the ways
in which they are not living up to the
fantasy version that we had of them in
our heads so in order to get over
appreciation which means get over
limerence in the moment we have to
express directly to people what exactly
it is that they did that we appreciated
them for
so this is going to get interesting if
you have a lot of limerence around
someone because often the appreciation
that we feel for people who we have
limits around in our minds is not tied
to anything that they actually did in
reality the appreciation that we feel
for them inside of our minds is often
tied to something that we imagined them
doing based on something we extrapolated
from reality so let's say i'm having a
bad day and my friend is really present
and attentive with me and there for me
and instead of telling them hey i
appreciated you spending an hour with me
today when i was having a hard time i
decided in my head this person cares
about me so much and they are always
going to be there for me every time i
need someone now i've accidentally
created that expectation right because i
didn't just appreciate them for what
happened and then moved on with no
expectation about the future so now it's
not just a nice time that i had with my
friend it's a relationship i'm having
with them inside of my head that doesn't
necessarily resemble reality in which i
think that they will always be there for
me so this is now no longer a present
authentic experience of connection it
was in those moments when they were
present and attentive with me but even
then i'm gonna correct my own example
even then i don't know for sure that
they were being present and attentive
with me unless they told me that
directly they could have just been
staring at me thinking about something
completely different and i could have
interpreted that as presence and
connection so the only thing i could
really say to them that were true is i
appreciate you speaking with me or
spending time around me this afternoon
so we have to be really careful when
we're telling people what we appreciate
them for that we are not telling
ourselves any story about what they did
and this is
extraordinarily difficult to do
extraordinarily we are so trained to
attach motives to people's behaviors
that it is almost impossible at first to
root out what actually happened versus
what we believe their motive to be so
actually in the enough peaceful boot
camp course we talk a lot about this so
we talk about looking at situations that
happen as though you are a robot who can
only note down what tangibly happened in
real time so a robot watching me
interact with my friend would not be
able to note down the friend was present
and attentive all they could note down
is the friend was looking in the other
friend's face friend one spent three
hours with friend two when friend one
said i'm sad friend two said i'm so
sorry that you're feeling that way those
are the only types of things we should
be expressing appreciation towards
people for because those are things that
concretely definitely happened and that
have no layer of interpretation on top
of them right so if i tell my friend i
appreciate that you spent three hours
with me today that is expressing
appreciation for something that
definitely definitely happened i
appreciate that you supported me i
appreciated that you were there for me
those things are all interpretations
right they weren't necessarily
supporting me for all i know they were
manipulating me and they were just using
my weakness as a way to get something
they want out of me right it is
inaccurate to assume anything about
what's going on in someone else's inner
world and so to stop ourselves from
making those assumptions and then
running away in our brains with them we
have to learn to appreciate people in
real time for only things that we can be
concretely sure happened okay and we can
report what that made us feel so when
you spent three hours with me today i
felt very warm and happy and safe in my
body and we can maybe explain to them
what that means and radical honesty
would say that's even taking it a little
bit too far and you should only report
what you feel in your body but for the
purpose of this video and the purpose of
not making this a video that is just
describing the communication tactics of
radical honesty i just want to make sure
i'm emphasizing that it's about
centering yourself in your own
experience not assigning judgments not
assigning values not assigning positive
qualities to the other person and just
noticing what happened what you felt
when that thing happened and then
thanking them for that and moving on not
making a story about how they're always
going to do that not making a story
about why they did that not making a
story about whether or not they owe you
a continuation of that all of those
things are limerent thoughts that keep
us out of reality and out of real time
connection with someone so this has to
become an ongoing practice of
recognizing what is concretely happening
versus what we imagine that to mean and
the more that we can separate out
reality from fantasy or imagination the
more we can experience real-time
connection with someone because we're
actually grounding our experience with
them in reality right so some real-time
grounded experiences might be i
appreciate that you smiled when i told
you a joke i appreciate that you went to
the mall with me and we spent a day
together i appreciate that you cooked
dinner tonight and gave me some okay so
things that actually happened and so
when you have a limerent object it could
be really helpful to just think about
what has concretely transpired between
myself and this other person that a
neutral third party who had no ability
to mind read at all could observe and
note down as something that concretely
happened those are the true experiences
that you share with someone those are
the true connection points you have
those are the true moments you need to
be referencing in your relationship with
someone what's not real is any
interpretation you're making about it
and i feel like i am rambling a lot now
but it's an important ramble because i
think that we are so not used to making
those distinctions we are used to taking
one interaction we have with someone or
a series of interactions that we have
with someone making a story about it
then getting so attached to that story
that we cannot for the life of us figure
out where is reality and where it is not
reality and that is one of the most
important tools we will ever learn in
our lives when it comes to forming real
connections because real connections can
only form over shared realities and so i
will do much more follow-up content on
this because i'm realizing as i'm
speaking that i have so much to say on
it and so many thoughts on it but the
important takeaway points are i'm going
to go over the three things that we've
talked about today one limerence is not
the same thing as sexual attraction it's
also not the same thing as true
connection limerence is about the
relationship that we have with someone
in our heads and that relationship is
not real you might have a real
relationship with someone in reality but
the limerence you have around them the
version of them that you have in your
head is not real and we have to be able
to recognize that if we want to have a
real connection with them and i also
want to note a lot of us might think we
want real connections but we don't
because real connections require us to
be vulnerable they require us to take
responsibility for our actions and show
up in our adult selves they require us
to not project onto other people and
blame them for things and for a lot of
us that's really scary i still feel like
it's really hard for me to have
connections that don't include any of
those things so really really think
about that right don't beat yourself up
for it don't tell yourself you're wrong
or stupid or doing things wrong if you
have trouble letting go of any of those
things and if you do prefer that fantasy
connection i still actively fight with
myself all the time i love my fantasy
connections they feel much more safe to
me than real connections but real
connections make me feel more alive and
i'm learning to follow that feeling
which has its other perks and benefits
but anyways second takeaway to get rid
of limerence we have to understand its
function and what it is that we believe
this fantasy is protecting us from or
giving to us because until we understand
that and until we find a way to get that
feeling or to change the need for that
feeling in our lives we're just going to
continuously replace limerent objects in
our brain with other limerent objects
literally until we die and many people
do this many many many people i would
almost argue most people live that way
and they go the majority of their lives
not having very many moments of true
connection right so figuring out and
taking responsibility for meeting your
needs requires us to notice when we're
putting a person in some stand-in
position for a real need that we have in
our minds and expecting them to meet
that need so that we don't have to meet
it for ourselves third thing recognize
what your real relationship is with
someone what the real connection moments
and points that you have are versus
where you're just feeling connected to
the story that you're telling yourself
in your head about this person and then
you have to be willing to get over and
let go of the story and all the nice
thoughts you have about them in your
brain in order to stay present in the
actual connection that you have with
them how will you know you're having
real connection with someone you are
actually physically in their presence
you are noticing the feelings in your
body they are telling you verbally or
expressing towards you that they feel a
connection between you right there are
very literal connections that we have
with people but a lot of us just run
away with the stories in our heads and
keep ourselves warm with those and that
is how limerence will leave you lonely
your entire life if you choose it and
you can many people do again this isn't
necessarily an argument for the moral
benefits of letting go of limerence it
is only an explanation of what you ought
to do if you want to start having real
connections and again sometimes we think
we want real connections but what we
actually want is for our limerent
objects to act in real life the way
they're acting in our heads right real
connection means people are really not
always going to do the things we want
them to do people are really not always
going to feel the way we want them to
feel people are really not always going
to show up the way we want them to show
up but there is immense benefit to
choosing those connections anyways and
that is way outside the scope of this
video but for today i just wanted to
talk about what limerence is and if you
want to get over it which i think most
of us have to think long and hard about
whether we actually do
what you can do to do that and these are
all of your starting points all right
this has been a longer video so let me
know in the comments if you manage to
get to this point what your thoughts are
what's coming up for you as we talk
about limerence and limerent objects and
the experience of getting over limerence
how you feel when you think about
getting over limerence because for a lot
of people it's a lot scarier than we
think to let go of limerence to let me
know what's coming up for you as always
i love you guys i hope you're taking
care of yourselves and each other and i
will see you back here again really soon
[Music]