hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here for the last couple of
weeks on this channel we have been
talking about Shadow work so if you
don't know what I mean when I say the
term Shadow work I will link a video in
the description of this one that goes
over what the shadow is and how we can
start working with it but today what I
want to talk about specifically is the
role of the shadow in self-sabotage
behaviors so I tend to take these
somewhat radical Viewpoint that there's
no such thing as self-sabotage I believe
that all parts of the self are striving
towards the betterment or the greater
good of the self but we can sometimes
have very severe coordination issues
between those different parts of the
cell and the less psychologically
integrated you are the more coordination
issues you're going to experience and
the more you're going to feel like you
are chronically fighting yourself to get
anything done so what we need to do in
order to start that integration process
is become aware of what is in our shadow
and like young says make the unconscious
conscious so that it stops directing our
lives so the bad news is that if you are
self-sabotaging there's likely a lot of
stuff in your psychological shadow that
needs to be worked through but the good
news is that integrating it is probably
going to go a long way in helping your
self-esteem because when we feel like
there is this major part of ourselves
that wants us to be unhappy we kind of
make an enemy out of ourselves and
that's a pretty uncomfortable and
largely miserable way to live a much
Kinder view you can hold of yourself is
the view that something that looks like
self-sabotage to your conscious mind can
actually look like a very deep Act of
self-love on an unconscious level so
it's not that you you're such a piece of
crap that even you hate yourself it's
that the different parts of yourself all
of which want to see you happy and
healthy just need better communication
and coordination so I kind of liken this
to having an office building that is
open 24 hours a day and let's say there
is a day shift and a night shift and the
day shift works with the lights on
they're largely very aware of what
they're doing and they have very clear
instructions that all of them are
following but then at night they turn
off all of the lights in the office
building and the day shift goes home and
in comes the night shift and the night
shift has a totally different set of end
goals than the day shift but there's no
way for the two departments to
communicate with each other so the night
shift comes in kind of bumbles around in
the dark tries the best they can to meet
their bottom lines and then when the day
shift comes in again in the morning
they're likely to arrive at an office
where things have been spilled on
important documents where everything is
cluttered and out of order and it would
be very easy to conclude the night shift
is trying to sabotage the day shift when
in reality both teams are just striving
to meet the goals that they have been
given it's just that neither team has an
awareness of the goals and bottom lines
of the other team so it might
chronically feel like each one is
working against each other when in
reality they're all just doing the best
that they can to make sure the company
flourishes so using this metaphor and
applying it to self-work the day shift
represents what's going on in your
conscious mind so the goals and plans
that you are very clear on and aware of
and the night shift represents what's
happening in your unconscious or
subconscious mind so the needs and
feelings and impulses that are important
to you but that you aren't consciously
aware of and the goal of doing Shadow
work is to kind of turn the lights on in
the building when the night shift is
operating so that you get clear on what
it is that the night shift is trying to
do and you can eventually sync up the
different parts of yourself that want
different things and figure out how to
get them working talking together so
that you are not taking one step forward
and two steps back and you're actually
able to set holistic goals that meet
your needs long term so again my
personal view on self-sabotage and the
way that I try to think of it in order
to work more effectively in relationship
with myself is that all self-sabotage is
is self-love emanating upwards from the
subconscious mind so some part of me
when I feel like I'm standing in my own
way or sabotaging myself is trying to
love me in a way that I don't understand
maybe there's some form of
self-protection that my subconscious
mind feels is very important for me that
I'm neglecting in my conscious mind so
my job when I feel like I'm in
self-sabotage mode is not to fight with
myself it is to understand what benefit
some part of me is getting from acting
out of alignment with my conscious goals
and when I'm able to get in touch with
that part of myself figure out what it
needs and learn how to move towards my
goal in a way that integrates that need
or learn how to adjust my goal if it
turns out that the goal I had is
something that I think I want but
subconsciously I really don't then in
either case I'm at least eliminating my
own internal tension
so I'm just going to Loosely Define
self-sabotage here because again it's a
term that I don't love is the process of
struggling to change in a way that you
have consciously decided you really want
to change and there are so many reasons
why this happens but I think a really
big one is that the conscious mind has a
tendency to paint things in the brush
Strokes of all good or all bad or mostly
good or mostly bad whereas almost any
experience or challenge or new
opportunity that we could take on in
life has elements to it that we are
going to feel very aligned with and
elements to it that are going to
threaten Us in some way or that we're
going to feel uncomfortable with but
sometimes the only part of us that is
aware of the latter part of a given plan
is our subconscious mind so that which
exists in the shadow of our
psychological awareness so you could
pick something that your conscious mind
might think is just unilaterally quite
Obviously good like okay I want to be
super rich and famous right A lot of
people instinctively go that is a thing
that would just make my life wonderful
on so many levels and there are a lot of
levels where that might be true maybe
getting rich and famous solves your
money problems gives you more travel and
dating opportunities and all of these
other benefits that come along with it
but it would also come with a whole slew
of new problems and challenges that you
have probably never had to deal with
before if you were rich and famous you
would be constantly in the public eye
and frequently getting scrutinized or
criticized that might be really
difficult for your inner child who might
live largely in your Shadow to deal with
or you might have new threats popping up
around your ability to keep yourself
safe maybe you're suddenly getting
stalked or harassed and having your
privacy consistently invaded and that
might be incredibly taxing on your
nervous system so in that kind of office
building that makes up your mind the day
shift's job might be something like make
me feel good about myself at any cost
and the day shift is going to be working
as hard as it possibly can to get you
those opportunities that are going to
help your self-esteem or solve your
financial problems or whatever it is
that you think is going to go into
making you feel good but let's say the
night shift's job is to make you feel
protected and safe at all costs if
you're pursuing Fame and Fortune the
night shift is going to come in and go
what is the day shift doing what we're
trying to do is keep this person safe
and protected and they're putting
themselves directly In Harm's Way We
need to immediately reverse the steps
that the day shift is taking in order to
accomplish our end goal of keeping this
person protected and safe so again
integration happens when we get these
two departments talking to each other if
I want to be rich and famous I have to
accept that it's also going to be very
stressful and very taxing on my mental
and physical health in some ways how do
I strike a balance how much recognition
am I willing to get for how much nervous
system stress and of course this
particular challenge is one that very
few of us end up facing but any pause
positive change we take on in our lives
comes with a similar set of trade-offs
and the work of ceasing to self-sabotage
is the work of making those trade-offs
conscious so that we can begin working
effectively with them so I remember I
hit a point last fall where I was
getting into YouTube and really enjoying
it and I had to kind of put YouTube on
hold because I was finishing my
dissertation at the time but I had all
of these plans and ideas brewing for
what I was going to do with my work
after I finished my dissertation and
what happened is I wrapped up my
schooling and then I had almost no
desire whatsoever to get back into
YouTube despite the fact that I was
immensely enjoying it prior to that
point and I really sat with myself and
was like I don't know what's going on I
love YouTube I love making videos I love
connecting with people over psychology
what is happening here that I just can't
seem to motivate myself to get back into
things and I ended up doing a coaching
call in the call the coach was asking me
what's it feel like to be you right now
and don't think too hard about it just
kind of get a visual if you were to
visually represent what was happening
right now and let me know what visual
you're getting and I was like okay when
I sink into it I see myself standing in
the middle of this park that is near
where I was living at the time in
Colorado and I see the beautiful
mountains on one side and my home on the
other side and I feel a kind of stress
because I visualize these opportunities
flying past me almost like these
colorful pieces of paper in the wind and
I have this sense that I should grab
onto those opportunities but I don't
want to I want to stay exactly where I
am
and the coach asked me well what does it
feel like to be in that park for you
and immediately I was like that's the
easiest question I could possibly answer
I love being in this park in real life I
come to this park and just walk around
and think every single day often for a
couple of hours a day and when I'm in
this park I feel calm I feel relaxed I
feel inspired there's beautiful scenery
my mind feels open the person who at the
time I was dating lived on one side of
the park and I had friends who kind of
lived in the other direction of the park
and anytime I went and spent time there
I had this feeling like I was loved from
every direction around me and the coach
went okay great what would happen if you
were to grab one of those papers as they
flew by you and I went oh I would be
worried that I would lift off the ground
and get carried just clear out of the
park holding onto this paper and then I
had a massive aha moment where I
realized that in the past when I'd
worked as a writer and my professional
career had started to gain some traction
I'd started to take on opportunities
because I was very young at the time
that I didn't feel truly aligned with I
just thought oh my God people are
offering me money and opportunities that
of course I should take because anyone
in their right mind would recognize
these as growth opportunities and grab
them but what happened was I ended up
getting further and further away from
what I genuinely loved about the process
of writing as soon as I started
following opportunities faster than I
could keep up with them I started
feeling really out of my element and my
creativity kind of died alongside that
and so now as I was feeling that
Creative Energy come back the part of me
that knew that I needed stability love
from all sides and a sense of home and
comfort felt threatened as soon as that
creativity came back online and so I sat
down with myself and I made a deal with
myself I told myself you can get back
into doing creative work because I do
consider YouTube to be a creative field
as long as you promise yourself that no
matter what opportunities come up you
will only say yes to them if they do not
in a significant long-term way threaten
your ability to stay grounded at peace
and in connection with the people that
you love those things need to always be
at the center of your life because they
are what actually matter to you in life
so it does not matter if the person you
respect and admire the most in the world
comes up to you and offers you a project
that is going to make you billions of
dollars you have to answer no if it
would take you away from those feelings
that make your life feel meaningful to
you and as soon as I made that promise
to myself in a way that I knew that I
would keep it was suddenly like I was
going through this absolutely abundant
creative spring where all of my ideas
returned to me and I had all of this
energy to start executing on them and
we're going to talk more about this in a
future video but what that is is a
negotiation between the inner child and
the inner parent so in order for me to
feel creative inspired and energized my
inner child has to be healthy and active
so I need to be communicating with what
that inner child needs and in the story
I just explained my inner child was
letting me know that they need a certain
degree of stability and relational
consistency in order to feel safe enough
to take creative risks and my inner
parent accepted that they had to honor
that because if they didn't their inner
child was going to get depressed and a
depressed inner child is going to be
deeply uncreative and without creativity
the inner parent cannot meet the
professional goals that they want to
have met so the inner child as far as I
see it represents our needs our
vulnerabilities our passions and what we
feel aligned with in the short term
and the inner parent represents the part
of ourselves that is disciplined and
knows what's good for us in the long
term if the inner parent is consistently
setting and rigidly enforcing rules that
the inner child thinks are stupid or
that are too restrictive they're going
to start lashing out or protesting in
some way and on the flip side you do not
want the inner child running the entire
show because they have no idea how to
work with their own energy and manage it
well so again we're going to go into
this more in a future video but an
important thing to think about might be
does my inner parent or my inner child
tend to run the show more often and how
can I get them talking to each other in
a more Cooperative way so to bring this
more directly back to self-sabotage
we're going to go over some of the ways
that I recommend working with the shadow
that part of yourself where you have
repressed certain needs or certain
personality traits inside of yourself in
order to stop that cycle of feeling like
you are working against yourself so
strategy number one for getting more
aligned with yourself in your own goal
is figure out which of your goals are
based on authentic embodied wants versus
which of your goals are based on things
you feel like you should do that you
actually on an emotional level would
kind of rather die than do which might
be the response that your body is giving
you when you try to move towards it kind
of shrinking away averting having low
energy suddenly getting tired when you
think about doing something feeling
overwhelmed all of these can be signs
that what you're trying to move towards
is not something that you actually want
it's something that you think you should
be doing so maybe we're being offered
some job that is really high paying
really impressive and that our families
would think we were really cool for
having and yet maybe we're totally
unmotivated to go for that job or we
find ourselves bombing the interview
because our bodies do not want the
reality of that job doesn't matter how
impressive it looks on the surface if
we're not going to enjoy doing the
day-to-day tasks of that job our body is
going to react with a no
and a no in the body often feels like a
lack of energy like an inability to
concentrate whatever it is that is
preventing us from moving towards the
thing that we think we should want in
our conscious minds and so often when
this happens when we have a conscious
want but for whatever reason our energy
is not responding to it in the way that
we hoped it would a good question to ask
ourselves can be what about this is it
possible that I don't want when I think
about my day-to-day having this new
thing or experiencing this new
opportunity what about that day-to-day
life would I not like and is it possible
that I've really been avoid looking at
that reality with my conscious mind and
if so how can I draw my awareness to a
bigger more integrated picture of what
this thing would look like and make
negotiations with myself around what I
am versus am not willing to do to get
that which leads us kind of into the
second Point here which is that often in
order to make a significant change in
our lives that we are experiencing
resistance around the most impor
important thing we can do is get clear
with ourselves on what we are getting
out of not making that change which
again is often difficult to access
because it is a part of our shadow so
one of the best books I've ever read in
my life is the book how we change and 10
reasons why we don't by Ross ellenhorn
and in this book he talks about the fact
that often the reason why we don't walk
away from uncomfortable circumstances or
situations we consciously think we don't
want to be in is because there are a lot
of benefits we are getting out of the
situation that are not in our conscious
awareness so let's say I am in a
terrible relationship and I just can't
seem to leave it for whatever reason
chances are unconsciously what I know is
that leaving that relationship would
mean leaving my main source of stability
or Comfort or companionship and I don't
have a way of filling those needs
elsewhere yet maybe the job I'm working
is not properly meeting my practical
needs maybe it doesn't pay enough for
the hours are terrible but it's meeting
a ton of my emotional needs that I'm not
aware of maybe I feel kind of cared
about by my boss because he reminds me
of the kind of authoritative form of
parenting that I grew up with so maybe
there's a sense of deep Comfort I get
even inside of something that I
consciously don't like it's going to be
really hard to for example manage your
weight if food is your main source of
comfort because it's possible to kind of
deny that need using willpower for a
certain period of time but definitely
not forever if you don't find a way to
get that need met in other ways as soon
as you lose the weight you're going to
go right back to using food for comfort
and the whole cycle is going to start
all over again it won't get broken until
you find alternate means of comfort
besides eating or drinking or whatever
it is that you're currently turning to
so again instead of asking yourself why
do I hate myself and can't manage to
make this change last ask yourself which
repetitive need is this Behavior
fulfilling
and how do I find a way to get that need
fulfilled without this particular
Behavior because this need is a part of
me that loves me and that wants me to
thrive a human being cannot Thrive they
cannot reach their full potential
without feeling a sense of comfort so if
we don't know how to get it through
people we'll get it somewhere else that
need will go on trying to fulfill itself
it's only once we make it conscious that
we can actually start making choices
about how to fulfill it without
significantly getting in the way of what
else we want and keep in mind that even
the most positive relationships or
opportunities come with adjustments that
need to be made that your entire system
is probably going to take some time to
get used to so Brianna Wiest who is a
brilliant writer wrote extensively about
this in a book she put out called the
mountain is you in the book she goes
over how What We crave is most often
what is familiar to us rather than what
we find let's say the most consistently
exciting and so sometimes when we're
working towards something that we really
want in our conscious mind but we're
experiencing inner resistance it might
be that what we actually need is time to
adjust to the positive change and all of
the little negative aspects that come
along with it even if they aren't that
significant so there's a quote I
absolutely adore from that book that
goes resistance is your way of slowing
down and making sure that it's safe to
get attached to something new again
everything no matter how wonderful comes
with an adjustment period if I'm getting
to know someone in a romantic sense it
does not matter how wonderful I think
they are how aligned we seem to be how
inspired I feel being close to them I am
still making considerable changes to get
close to them there is time that I used
to devote to other things that I am now
devoting to getting close to this person
there is a routine I have that is
probably getting disrupted in some
capacity and emotionally my inner child
is kind of side eyeing this person and
going are they safe for me to really
trust and lean into even if my conscious
mind has already decided yes if I'm
being offered a new professional
opportunity that is going to drastically
change the way that my day-to-day life
functions it is going to take my system
a long time to get used to those changes
and to trust that they're net positive
and that there are parts of this new
routine and this new opportunity and
this new life that I'm living around it
that are good enough to Warrant giving
up certain other things that I've gotten
very accustomed to on various levels it
takes time for our nervous systems to
kind of gather enough data over a long
enough period of time to concede with
our conscious Minds assessment that this
thing is net positive and that is okay
so the point here is to illustrate that
sometimes we're experiencing resistance
to what we want because it's more of a
should when in reality we truly don't
want it but other times we're
experiencing resistance because we're
just not giving our systems an enough
time to get used to something and to
kind of absorb it into our comfort zone
now of course we don't want to live our
whole lives inside of our comfort zone
but if we try to live our whole lives
outside of it our system is going to get
totally overwhelmed and start shutting
down in very major ways so we have to
find that kind of balance of how far can
we stretch ourselves and then how much
can we give ourselves time to adjust and
catch up to that stress until we've
constructed a kind of new normal for
ourselves that allows us to integrate
whatever new thing that it was we wanted
into our lives which leads me to the
fourth point that I want to talk about
if we want any positive change to stick
around what we have to be willing to do
is to make conscious that which we hate
about it and again I don't care how
wonderful the person you're dating is
how perfect and aligned for you your job
is whatever it is that you are trying to
move towards there will be trade-offs
and to give yourself the best chance at
succeeding at this thing long term you
have to be willing to continuously
recognize eyes when you are making a
trade-off validate the part of yourself
that is sad about that trade-off or that
doesn't want to make it and accept that
whatever part of you is taking that hit
is going to need to be compensated in
some other way so this is the art of
recognizing that not only do we have
shadows so part of ourselves that we
repress so does every other person and
every other thing out there and the more
we can account for the shadows of other
people and other situations the better
we are at making informed decisions
about those things and figuring out how
to integrate them into our lives without
desperately needing to change them in
order to fit them into our lives so
let's say you're dating someone and you
like that they are so positive and so
confident and yet you start feeling
super anxious and insecure around them
and you might go oh my God this is crazy
like how am I finding fault with this
person who is so positive and wonderful
it might just be worth acknowledging
that in the shadow of their positivity
and their independence is all all of
their true pain and their neediness and
if they can't access those parts of
themselves maybe you're really going to
struggle to connect with them in those
areas maybe when you're in pain or in
need they're not able to deeply meet you
there because they've repressed those
parts of themselves so the trait that
you are the most attracted to in them
comes with its own shadow and generally
the kind of more balanced a person is
psychologically the less extremes we're
going to see in their Shadow but that
also means the less extremes we're going
to see on the positive side and when we
have insecure attachment systems often
we're looking for people who outwardly
display that which we have in our own
shadow maybe I consider myself to be not
very compromising or not particularly
kind and then I meet someone and they
are so kind and so nurturing and so
emotionally expressive and they start
bothering the absolute crap out of me
and I start thinking to myself what is
wrong with me this is the nicest person
ever why are they bothering me so much
when in reality it might not be that I'm
just a terrible person who hates nice
people it might be that the shadow of
their niceness is a lack of
assertiveness maybe they very rarely if
ever stand up and tell me what they
actually want or what their needs are
and with that comes a complete lack of
tension in our relationship maybe
there's kind of nothing interesting
there for me to feel like I can sink my
teeth into because they're not showing
me the full range of themselves and so
it's kind of natural that I'm feeling my
attraction lesson because I'm picking up
on something real which is the lack of
tension that arises between two people
perceiving each other's differences
which is very often the birthplace of
Attraction so this isn't about being
hyper critical but what it is about is
being realistic the question you need to
ask yourself is because this is a whole
person am I willing to take them and
their Shadow understanding that if they
were to change one aspect of themselves
the other aspect would change as well
everything in life has bad parts to it
wonderful opportunities come with
changes that will shock our systems and
that will come with new problems I've
spoken about it before but this is very
often an error that I see people making
in the attachment healing process they
think that healing their attachment
systems means things just get better and
better and better as they go when in
reality your insecure attachment
strategies are actually allowing you to
function quite well in many areas that
you're not aware of until you start the
healing process and so for a period of
time you might actually feel less
equipped to deal with your life and your
personal relationships the healthier you
get because it's like you learned a
whole bunch of cheat codes that you're
now having to put down and the game is
going to feel like it's on hard mode
until you can learn different strategies
for navigating it in a different way
which leads us to the last thing I want
to talk about when it comes to combating
what feels like self-sabotage which is
that in order to make changes and have
them be sustainable try to look at what
your day-to-day life is going to look
like if you accomplish a given goal or
outcome rather than just imagining the
Highlight Reel the Highlight Reel is
always constructed by the conscious mind
the day-to-day realities is always what
your unconscious or subconscious mind
gets faced with so I might have all of
these dreams of being a pop star but
when I really think about what it means
to be a pop star do I want to wake up
five years from now open my phone see a
whole bunch of tabloids slamming me not
be able to leave my house because
there's too much Paparazzi everywhere
and I have to train mercilessly to write
songs and master dance moves or is that
actually not the day-to-day life that I
want at all and for some people the
answer is yes if you really truly love
the thing that you are doing the
day-to-day components of what it takes
to play out a given goal then you're
probably going to be willing to put up
with a lot of the parts that you don't
like as much you're going to be more
willing to sacrifice some sleep
sacrifice some time sacrifice some money
or energy or trade in certain parts of
the life that you have now in order to
get the life you want but if you aren't
looking at the full reality of what you
want and factoring in what it's going to
actually feel like inside of your body
and your nervous system day to day to
have that thing that you want you're
going to get continuously blindsided
when your body is kind of shrinking away
from you trying to move towards it
because our bodies will shrink away from
anything that makes them deeply
uncomfortable or kind of shocked and
alarmed so when you're evaluating a
potential romantic partner are you
thinking of how good it would feel for
your ego to have that first kiss with
them or are you thinking of what a life
is going to look like with them five
years from now on a Tuesday afternoon
when you're making a significant career
change are you really thinking about
what it's going to feel like to wake up
in the morning five years from now
having made that change and looking at
your to-do list for that day if you
really want your body to look a certain
way are you really thinking about what
types of food you're going to have to
eat on a daily basis and what types of
exercise you're going to have to stay
consistent at in order to maintain that
body type and in any of these cases if
the answer is that you don't actually
like the day-to-day work that's involved
in that how could you kind of shift your
vision slightly to still move in the
direction of what your conscious mind
wants but in a way that is more aligned
with the way that your body likes to
feel and the more I can really slow down
this entire process and listen to my own
resistance when I feel it coming up the
more I'm going to learn about exactly
what I actually want
and the more I listen to what I actually
want the more my inner child wakes up
and the more my inner child wakes up the
more they give me Creative Energy and
inspiration to go towards the thing that
I actually want out of my life inner
children are crazy resilient they will
overcome any setback any challenge they
will not give up in the face of what
they truly want and so if we find
ourselves continuously self-sabotaging
one of the best things we can do is get
in touch with that inner child and
figure out what about this thing that
child does not want and remember
children don't care all that much about
things like Prestige or accolades those
are things adults care about because
they have lost connection with the part
of themselves that just likes to be
happy and joyful in life and doesn't
need all that much to do it so if you
can find something that your inner child
genuinely loves doing on a day-to-day
basis that ends up moving you in the
direction of something that's
prestigious or impressive and nature
that's going to be a much smoother
process but if you're trying to fight
yourself to get there every step of the
way that's only going to work for so
long the process of ending self-sabotage
is the process of getting really honest
with ourselves about what we actually
want and what parts of the thing that we
actually want are challenging or
negative or depriving us of needs in
some area that we have to find other
ways of attending to and the process of
ending self-sabotage is the process of
getting back in touch with ourselves the
whole of ourselves both the day shift so
the conscious mind and the things that
we decide using logic and reason and a
conscious awareness of our feelings that
we want and the night shift so the part
of ourselves that is working to fulfill
the needs we have repressed into our
shadow but with minimal resources and
ways of going about it because the
conscious mind is pretending that the
night shift's job does not exist the
more we can turn on the lights figure
out the the entire gamut of what is
happening inside of our mind
psychologically the more we are going to
find ways to achieve what we want with
minimal resistance but this might mean
we achieve it at a slower Pace because
if I want some massive change in my life
but my entire system freaks out anytime
I start moving towards it because I'm
trying to achieve it too quickly getting
the day and the night shift talking to
each other might mean I have to
significantly adjust my timeline so that
I can give myself the opportunity to
move towards something at a pace that
actually makes sense for me it might
mean I have to accept that I need to
learn new skills if I want to get the
thing that I want in a sustainable way
it might mean that I have to sacrifice
some part of my ego that has
traditionally been a core part of the
way that I think about myself that might
be a really painful process that takes a
long time to move through so when we are
engaging in Shadow work when we are
making conscious the parts of ourselves
that have not been in our conscious
awareness there's often a lot of pain
and we need a lot of rest and a lot of
patience with ourselves but this is the
way that we end up designing a life for
ourselves that we are not only excited
about but that we can actually hold on
to because all parts of ourselves are
present and accounted for within it all
right that's all I have to say for today
on the topic of self-sabotage and
working with the shadow as always let me
know in the comments what you guys are
thinking feeling experiencing I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and your inner children enter
in her parents and I will see you back
here again really soon
[Music]
thank you