hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel
and for the next five days of this week
I'm going to talk about the concept of
Shadow work so Shadow work is a term
that's become I wouldn't say popular but
you see it more frequently than you used
to in pop culture to describe working
with the parts of ourselves that we have
repressed or have kind of hidden from
ourselves inside of our own minds so the
concept of Shadow work originated from
Carl Young's work but it's been adapted
to mean a lot of different things and
there's a couple of different reasons
why I wanted to talk about it today one
it is super prevalent to attachment
healing work and a lot of what we talk
about on this channel is attachment
healing work if you are doing true
attachment healing work so what I mean
by that is not learning about attachment
theory for sport or to learn to better
manipulate others but to actually heal
the Deep wounds that exist within
yourself you are by definition doing
Shadow work
attachment Theory predominantly looks at
what we learned to repress very early on
in order to not get rejected or
abandoned by our caregivers and this is
pretty much exactly what shadow work
looks at as well but what shadow work
focuses on is making those parts of our
psyches that we repressed early on and
kind of distanced ourselves from very
conscious in our awareness so that we
can ideally integrate those parts of
ourselves and have a more sane and
well-rounded experience of being alive
so in short according to Young there are
parts of our personalities that are very
conscious to us right so the ways that
we like to think of ourselves and the
kind of terms that we would use to
describe ourselves if someone else were
to ask us who we are but there are also
parts of our personality that are
unconscious or repressed so these are
often the things that we consciously
like to think we do not have prevalent
in us at all so if I kind of hinge my
ego on being a good caring empathetic
person I might not want to admit to
myself or to other people that parts of
me are selfish narcissistic and
judgmental or whatever it is but just
because we've repressed certain things
from our conscious awareness does not
mean that those things disappear from
our personality they go on operating
under the surface and they just affect
their lives in unconscious ways so we're
going to talk as this video goes on
about how that can happen and what it
might look like to have a part of your
Shadow Self impacting your life without
you understanding what's happening but
the basic theory is when we're very
young if there are certain traits that
are deemed socially unacceptable in our
early environments we're going to learn
to disidentify with those traits tell
ourselves that's not me that's not who I
am and live our lives in a way that
mostly avoids having to express those
traits intentionally but those traits go
on operating under the surface and
expressing themselves unconsciously
which can end up looking like forms of
self-sabotage forms of confusion around
why we keep attracting the same types of
people or situations that we consciously
think we don't want we're going to go
over a wide variety of ways in which our
shadow selves might show up in our lives
as this video goes on but for now what's
important to understand is that we all
have parts of ourselves that we have
hidden from ourselves and those hidden
parts do not disappear just because we
start disidentifying with them they go
on finding ways to creatively Express
themselves and meet the world just
without our conscious awareness so young
had a very famous quote about this that
I personally absolutely love that goes
until you make the unconscious conscious
it will direct your life and you will
call it fate and it's important to point
out that it's not just negative things
that we repress about ourselves it could
be positive traits that we have in our
shadow as well so this isn't about
what's good and what's bad it's about
what was useful and what was not useful
for you early on in life so as this week
goes on we're going to talk about not
only how to look for the kind of
negative or anti-social aspects of our
shadow selves but how to look for the
parts of our shadow selves that we might
actually like and really enjoy
integrating into our lives but that we
weren't able to do early on because our
primary social environments didn't make
room for those traits even if they're
positive now I want to also be clear
this isn't a morality thing kind of
inherent to the shadow is the idea that
all humans have access to all of these
parts of ourselves the parts of
ourselves that are empathetic and
pro-social but also the parts of
ourselves that are very judgmental and
critical and anti-social and only out
for ourselves but the end goal of this
is to be able to integrate all of these
things and as the week goes on we're
going to talk about why you might
actually need to get in touch with some
of those kind of darker or more
stereotypically bad parts of yourself
and bring them into conscious awareness
in order to start behaving in a way that
is more functional for you and other
people so as a kind of Cole's notes of
how this relates to attachment Theory I
did make a video series earlier on this
year that talks about the biggest blind
spots for each attachment style so I
will link those videos in the
description of this one it gives a
pretty good overview of what you could
call the shadow of each type but very
quickly those who are more anxious on
the attachment Spectrum have a tendency
to repress their own Badness so for most
people who air anxious there is this
need to see the self as good and
innocent at any cost and the healing
process for anxious Styles often
involves getting in touch and owning the
parts of yourself that are actually
behaving in a selfish way healthy
selfishness is needed in order to set
boundaries to stand up for yourself and
to protect yourself so that you're not
chronically looking for protection from
others and the more you're able to do
those things and Foster a sense of
self-respect and Independence the less
you are accidentally chronically asking
of other people which kind of makes you
an easier person to be around even
though it might not feel that way from
the get-go on the flip side those on the
avoidant side of the spectrum tend to
have a blind spot around taking your own
negative experiences and feelings
seriously and this might feel like a
good thing initially because you feel
like you have learned to be resilient
and to move through difficult things
with ease which might even make you a
more solid friend or partner for other
people but in the long run you end up
dismissing a lot of really important
emotional information both in yourself
and other people that could lead to
better discernment about the types of
relationships you engage with as well as
the choices that you make for your life
and with fearful avoidance you can get a
very confusing oscillation between these
two now the end goal of doing Shadow
work or attachment healing work in
general is being able to get back in
touch with your intuition so if you have
shoved a part of who you are completely
out of your conscious awareness and
disowned it that part is still going to
be active in your life but you're not
going to want to pay attention to it or
you're not going to want to believe what
it is telling you and whatever parts of
ourselves we have disowned have
important information for us that we
need to integrate in order to have good
discernment when we do not do Shadow
work when we leave our attachment Styles
unhealed what we are predominantly
rubbing ourselves of is the ability to
listen to our own intuition and to trust
it so if I obsessively need to think of
myself as a good innocent person and I
have this idea that abandoning somebody
makes me a bad person I'm going to stay
in really unhealthy Dynamics for much
much longer than the point where my
intuition tells me to get out because I
don't want to listen to that part of
myself that I've decided is selfish
because I think that all selfish
behavior is bad and that could cause me
to waste a lot of time and energy on
situations that it would have been
better for everybody if I had simply
walked away from and there are a lot of
less flattering examples of this kind of
thing that we're going to go over as we
go through this video so in short Shadow
work is integrating the parts of
ourselves that we have disowned and now
think are bad terrible and no good and
that we don't want to identify with at
all and it's important to note that Carl
Young spoke about both a personal Shadow
so parts of ourselves that we have
disowned and distanced ourselves from
consciously but also a collective Shadow
so things that certain groups of people
or societies have come to disown and try
to distance themselves from and often
those things feed into themselves so
this week what I'm going to be talking
about is not just what's within our
personal Shadows but also what seems to
be very alive right now inside of the
collective Shadow and how some of us
might be abandoning or further
distancing ourselves from traits that it
might actually help us to integrate
because we fear that integrating those
parts of ourselves will lead us to
social rejection alright so now that
we've talked a little bit about what the
shadow is I want to talk about where you
can look for your shadow in your
everyday life so if you're like okay I
kind of get this in theory but I'm not
sure how to tell where my own shadow
shows up or how I could go about working
with it here are some of the things you
might want to consider one any pattern
of behavior that feels like
self-sabotage is usually the Shadow Self
showing up so there is some need that we
have denied we have that is trying to
get itself fulfilled despite our
conscious mind thinking that we
shouldn't or don't want that thing it's
like this unintegrated part of herself
is jumping up and down going Notice Me
Notice Me notice me pay attention to me
give me what I need and in this way we
can actually start to reframe
self-sabotage as an opportunity to
notice and integrate some part of our
shadow selves so the kind of classic
example of this is people feeling like I
really want to lose that last 10 or 15
pounds but I just can't seem to stop
emotional eating noticing that can be a
kind of string that you follow into your
Shadow what emotion that you don't want
to confront front might you be soothing
through emotional eating some kind of
common themes I've seen in that area is
anger when anger unless it is perfectly
Justified is a feeling that people
believe they shouldn't have or ought not
to express they can turn to numbing
behaviors to kind of down regulate from
that anger the need for comfort that we
feel like we maybe don't deserve or
don't know how to ask for can lead to
numbing behaviors repress shame or fear
or lust anything that we feel as though
we ought not to express but our body is
still presenting us with can lead us to
instinctively try to Source something
that is going to change our state
because if I'm really angry but I have
this part of my mind that's like oh you
shouldn't feel angry unless you are
perfectly Justified and in this
situation I don't believe you're
perfectly justified in feeling your
anger Ergo I'm going to try to stop you
from noticing how angry You Are by
shoving a bunch of food or alcohol or
drugs or whatever it is so that your
body State changes and you don't have to
encounter that anger anymore which would
make you a bad bad person at least
that's what I might believe or let's say
I suddenly cannot focus anytime I go to
do a particular task that I feel a sense
of Shame around like oh there's this one
thing that I really should have done a
long time ago and the longer and longer
I go without doing it the more and more
shame I feel and because I don't know
how to tolerate shame because I cannot
think of myself as the type of person
who maybe would need help with this task
or who doesn't do everything perfectly
the more my body is going to freak out
and try to instantly rescue me from that
feeling of Shame by getting really
distracted every time it comes up when I
sit down to try to do that task and
start thinking about how I really should
have done it already so maybe there's
something in my shadow around needing
help or guidance that I need to
integrate in order to be able to arrive
at that task without a sense of shame
that overwhelms my ability to focus so a
big sign that there's something in your
shadow that needs to be integrated is
that you have a pattern if not multiple
patterns of behavior that looks or feels
like self-sabotage I think of
self-sabotage as a neglected part of
myself jumping up and down going Notice
Me Notice Me notice me I need attention
and if I can figure out what that part
of me is and how I can integrate it even
though I kinda hate it and really wish
it was not a part of me and that I could
go through the rest of my life without
it that's usually the most effective and
direct and long lasting route to making
self-sabotage behaviors disappear little
personal fact I am not passionate about
attachment theory for attachment
Theory's sake I got into attachment
Theory because I felt like I was
chronically self-sabotaging my life and
I remember reading a line in a book by
Judy Hollis that was talking about
compulsive comfort-seeking behaviors and
she was basically saying this is gonna
keep happening so long as your
relationship with nurturance is
unnatural and I remember being like oh
no that is me my relationship with
nurturance with accepting love and care
and support from other people is
definitely unnatural I want to feel like
I can get all of those things without
anybody else's help and without ever
having to admit any sort of
vulnerability and because I wanted to
stop self-sabotaging I reluctantly
started learning about attachment Theory
and now we're here in this place where I
had to spend three years deconstructing
myself psychologically but I will say my
life is relatively self-sabotage free at
this point which is super nice
doesn't mean I do everything right but
it does mean I have an awareness of why
I'm doing most things and I look at most
behaviors that I view as maladaptive as
opportunities to learn and integrate
more neglected parts of myself sign
number two you might want to start doing
Shadow work is that you feel like you
keep attracting the same types of
unhealthy relationships or unhealthy
people into your life over and over
again and you don't understand what
you're doing wrong we're going to talk a
lot more about this as the week goes on
but a quick rule of thumb is that when
we repress something in ourselves we
tend to be very quick to notice it in
other people and we will either hate
them for that quality with a passion or
we will feel out of our minds attracted
to them because of that quality or a mix
of both depending on what that quality
is and how the other person exhibits it
so if you want to know what's in your
Shadow take a look at the people you
love to hate so something that you see
in the kind of collective Shadow a lot
lately is narcissism right narcissism
has become like the number number one
word that a person cannot identify with
at any cost or else they are kind of
instantly dehumanized in a lot of online
spaces specifically so that might be
something to look at right which
narcissistic traits inside of ourselves
have we repressed or refused to
acknowledge that keeps us kind of
endlessly fixated on other people who
display those traits openly which leads
us to the third place where you might
want to look for your Shadow showing up
which is any area where you feel really
morally righteous one of the most
annoying parts of my healing Journey has
been accepting that anytime I feel
morally righteous about something there
is probably some part of my shadow that
needs to be integrated so I remember
recently someone asking me for a favor
that was so kind of brazen in the way
that they asked it despite the fact that
it would be a huge drain on my time and
my energy and they offered absolutely
nothing as a kind of trade and they
didn't even ask particularly kindly they
asked me kind of of like yeah of course
I would just want to devote all of this
time and energy to helping them out even
though they were being a little bit rude
to me in the way that they asked me and
I felt so morally righteous like I just
hopped right up on my high horse about
how this person had all of these kind of
narcissistic traits where they just
thought that everybody was there to
serve them and their emotional needs
which fit with a lot of the stories I'd
told myself about this person in the
past and then I decided to sit with the
feeling for a moment longer and go what
is the story that I'm telling myself
about asking for help what do I think
the appropriate conditions to ask for
help are and I realized that I have this
rule around only asking for help if it
is a perfectly Fair exchange so if there
is something that I can offer the other
person that is of equal value to what
I'm asking of them then I can ask for
help as a kind of exchange but are there
situations if I'm really honest with
myself where I have needed help and I
know that I don't have something of
equal value to offer the the other where
I have found a way to convince myself
that I am offering them something of
equal value when in reality I'm kind of
just trying to get the thing that I need
out of the situation so in those
situations where I convinced myself as
well as the other person that this is a
favor I'm doing both of us when really I
know that I'm kind of just doing it for
me is that not just a less honest
version of what this person is doing I
still have the part of myself like this
person does that needs help from other
people sometimes in areas where I have
nothing to offer in return the
difference is that I have repressed that
part of myself and told myself it
doesn't exist and so what happens when I
need help from someone else is I make up
a reason in my brain why it's going to
be a fair exchange of services or of
time or energy or whatever it is even if
that's not necessarily true in reality I
find a way to morally justify something
instead of just being honest that I need
something and I don't at this time have
something of a equivalent value to offer
in return so I'm still getting my needs
met just in a way that is subtly
manipulative because my shadow is at
play rather than asking directly for the
thing that I want that is unfair like
this person did because I know that
means I'm less likely to get it now the
lesson here is not become demanding and
expect everybody else to meet your needs
when you are not doing anything for them
in return the lesson is becoming aware
of both of those parts of myself so I
can integrate them the part that
sometimes wants things from other people
that I don't have a way of repaying them
for and the part of myself that wants to
be a good person who has things to offer
people and in the middle is what I can
actually work with right if I can be
aware of the times when I need or want
something and I don't have anything to
offer the other person in return I can
at least be honest and humble in the way
that I ask for that thing so instead of
trying to make it seem like a great deal
for them when it's maybe secretly not a
great deal for them I can humble myself
and go to of people and say hey I really
need help with X Y or Z or I would
really appreciate it if you would spend
some time with me hashing out this
particular topic I'm asking this for my
own benefit because it's important to me
personally and I want to acknowledge
that it might be inconvenient for you to
say yes to this so I want to open up a
conversation about what might make this
worthwhile for you and then we're
dealing with an honest situation right
nobody's trying to demean or intimidate
anybody into giving them help but
nobody's asking for the help under false
pretenses either and ultimately that's
what it ends up looking like when we do
things like healing or attachment style
so if we are anxious and we can't bear
to think of ourselves as morally bad in
any way our brains are going to end up
convincing ourselves that a lot of what
we do is for other people when it's
really for ourselves and to get our own
needs met and if we are avoidant we're
going to end up thinking that taking 100
care of our own needs and never asking
anybody else for anything is the right
thing to do when in reality we'd be
building much healthier and more honest
and reciprocal relationships if we were
practicing vulnerability in our
relationships as another example I
remember one time being in a coaching
call where I was explaining to the coach
that there was this really strong
judgment I held against someone in my
life and I was like I think that my
judgment is right and I think that if I
express this judgment in the form of
care and compassion towards this other
person it might actually offer them a
perspective on how their life could
operate better but the reason I don't
talk to them about this is because I
know that I also kind of want to hurt
them with the information if I'm being
really honest with myself
this is someone who in the past has been
really harsh and judgmental towards me
and I feel kind of morally Superior
knowing that now they're in a position
where they might need my help and the
coach said why don't you tell them both
of those things why don't you tell them
both I have information that I think
might help you with your situation and I
have a lot of pent-up frustration with
the ways that you have approached me in
the past and in this interaction I'm
feeling kind of morally Superior and
there's a part of me that secretly kind
of wants to hurt you in the way that I
deliver the information and again the
moral here is not to go in and be
hurtful in the interaction the moral is
to incorporate both sides of things the
part of me that genuinely wants to help
someone and the part of me that is hurt
and wants to hurt them in response and
bring it all into the light at once that
is how we have honest interactions with
people not by denying one side or the
other and running away with either our
feelings of martyrdom or our feelings of
sadism but by bringing them both into
our conscious awareness acknowledging
there's this ugly part of myself that I
don't like but it exists and then
finding a way to integrate those things
to find a solution that is respectful of
ourselves and respectful of other people
but it will absolutely without a shadow
of a doubt cause us to Dismount our high
horse so it's not going to be fun it's
just going to be useful in the long run
and in my opinion the more difficult our
relationships are it's often because
there's more in the shadow of that
relationship so this work becomes more
and more important the more we're
dealing with those really challenging
relationships this might look like
family relationships intimate partner
relationships the ones that really
trigger us tend to be the ones that have
the most in the shadow which brings us
to the fourth place that people often
recommend looking at in order to do
Shadow work which is our triggers now I
have a bit of a conflicted feeling
around this in the same event of trigger
is a word that we use to describe two
things in my opinion at this point in
pop psychology one is a genuine trauma
trigger when you are having a trauma
trigger in the PTSD sense of the term it
means your coping mechanisms are
currently overwhelmed in that state your
conscious mind is not really capable of
making sense of things in the way that
it can when you are in a regulated state
so I personally get frustrated when I
hear people say things like work with
your triggers or let your triggers be
the doorway to understanding yourself
more deeply that can be true but it's
not going to be true in the moment that
you are triggered in the moment of
trigger your coping mechanisms are by
definition overwhelmed what you need to
do is find a way to re-regulate yourself
and then you can potentially follow the
threads of your trigger back to what
instigated it but there is this other
way that we use the word trigger in pop
culture lately which I'm also fine with
I just think we need to differentiate
the two and the second way people tend
to use the word trigger seems to me to
be more akin to just describing having a
very strong emotional reaction very
strong emotional reactions are indeed
very often a product of the Shadow
coming online and that can be a great
place to look at your Shadow stuff the
difference and this is important is that
when we are looking at things like
attachment wounds attachment Styles or
strategies are about the ways that we
adapted effectively to our early
environment so if I grew up in a hostile
household and I learned showing negative
emotion is consistently met with
contempt or rejection or whatever it is
I will learn to not show negative
emotion and that will actually be an
Adaptive response in the environment
that I exist within air go it is not a
trauma response now can you have
attachment trauma yes absolutely but
attachment strategies are by definition
about figuring out what works in our
early environment without our nervous
system getting completely overwhelmed in
the process versus when you are having a
trauma response when a trauma trigger
has gone off you are responding in a way
that is disruptive to your normal
adaptive strategy your normal coping
mechanisms which absolutely include your
attachment strategy are overwhelmed and
disrupted when you're experiencing a
trauma response so we need to be able to
differentiate between when we are
triggered into our attachment patterning
versus when we are having a trauma
trigger something that triggers us into
our attachment patterning means we're
being triggered into a state that once
worked for us and got us what we want
the opposite of which we may have pushed
into our shadow a trauma trigger is
something that overwhelms our ability to
cope or to behave strategically even
unconsciously so trauma does absolutely
usually indicate something that is in
the shadow of our awareness but it's
going to be a little bit more difficult
to work with and it's probably probably
something you're going to need the help
of a trained professional to really get
down to the bottom of and the reason I
want to make that clear is because it
just feels crappy if you hear people
talking about triggers and they're
actually talking about the second type
of trigger when you're experiencing the
first type there can be all of this kind
of inner critic stuff that comes online
and goes why can't I learn from this why
can't I get the lessons out of my
triggers like other people seem to be
getting it might be because you are both
using the same word to describe two very
different things that being said the two
can interact with each other and impact
the expression of each other so it's
complicated the point I'm making here is
just that yes triggers can provide us
with very important information but
don't beat yourself up if you feel like
when you get triggered you're not able
to think clearly or rationally enough to
get that important information out of
the situation right away some triggers
are a lot easier to work with than other
ones but when it comes to that kind of
pop culture definition of the word
triggered which we tend to use to
describe having a very abnormally strong
emotional response to something so
getting really angry in a situation
where we recognize that other people
might not feel that level of anger or
feeling really self-righteous or
whatever it is that's usually a great
opportunity to examine what might be in
our shadow what about this do I find so
absolutely unpalatable and what might
that mean about what part of myself I
need to bring into my conscious
awareness and learn to integrate which
brings us to the last place that I
recommend we start looking for our
shadow which is in the projections that
we make both positive and negative about
other people so the people that we feel
the most disdain for contempt towards
who we feel the greatest desire to
change like something about that person
is not okay or not right and I need to
make sure they know it or I need to help
them fix it that's often an indication
that there's something in our shadow
that we're refusing to look at in
ourselves but that we see very clearly
in other people and the more it feels
like there's no way that thing's a part
of me the more it probably is you've
just shoved it out of your conscious
awareness but also the ways in which we
idealize other people so on this channel
we talk a lot about limerence right
which is a sense of romantic obsession
with someone else that can be our shadow
selves begging us to integrate a part of
ourselves that we have not allowed
ourselves to experience because it was
not adaptive in the social environments
we were raised in and we might get
really fixated on wanting or feeling
like we need someone else to be a part
of our Lives if they're strongly
displaying this trait that we have
learned to repress in ourselves but that
we really want in our life some part of
us knows to be whole I need this trade
in my life but if that trade exists in
our shadow we're going to look for its
fulfillment in other people rather than
nurturing it in ourselves we probably
believe it doesn't exist in ourselves
and we can only get it in other people
but we're going to talk a lot more about
that as the week goes on so the natural
question that all of this raises is how
do I do Shadow work and there's no one
perfect answer to this there are a lot
of different books you can buy and
courses you can take that will help you
figure out what's in your Shadow but
when it comes to working with the shadow
it's all going to depend on what it is
that's coming up but the good news is
you might already be doing Shadow work
you're just not calling it that so if
you are doing attachment healing work
again in the true sense of the term so
you are actually integrating the parts
of yourself that were not acceptable in
your early caregiving environment you
are already doing Shadow work if you are
doing inner child work and you're
working on integrating and caring for
the parts of yourself that you view as
kind of irrational or immature you are
doing Shadow work if you are working
with parts of yourself that you have
historically felt a lot of Shame around
and tried to keep hidden from other
people you are probably already doing
Shadow work most work around dealing
with triggers is Shadow work as is most
work around learning to unpack why we
self-sabotage and integrating the parts
of ourselves that are trying to express
themselves in ways that we do not
necessarily like so a lot of the work
that you might already be doing if
you're doing any sort of healing or
self-improvement work is likely to fall
in the shadow work category again as
long as it's about integrating and
welcoming in the parts of yourself that
you historically have tried to distance
from yourself and then of course there's
stuff that's not Shadow work anytime you
just feel like you're building and
building and building your ego in a way
that feels great all of the time you're
probably not doing Shadow work and
that's also okay we don't always need to
be doing Shadow work to be making
positive improvements in our life but we
do want to start doing it if we feel
like we're kind of out of control of
where our lives are going we don't
understand why we keep ending up in the
same unhealthy situations time and time
again and we would like to feel like we
are more in the driver's seat of where
our life is headed because we keep
trying to get out of our own way instead
of inviting our full self into the car
and taking all of those parts of
ourselves that we currently might see as
the problem with us on the journey all
right that's all I'm going to say about
Shadow work for today as always leave
any comments thoughts questions you have
in the comment section of this video we
will get more into the nitty-gritty of
what shadow work looks like as the week
goes on in the meantime I love you guys
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and your inner children
so your Shadow selves and I will see you
back here again tomorrow
foreign
[Music]