hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel
we're going to be talking about low
self-esteem and how it can manifest in
close relationships in a way that might
actually be sabotaging the relationship
without you noticing it at all so
essentially we are talking about blind
spots
today specifically the blind spots that
are most inherent to people who have low
self-esteem or ideas about themselves
that they are not as valuable as worthy
of care and connection as other people
and how this can actually become a
self-fulfilling prophecy Without You
meaning for it too so I'm just going to
Dive Right In Here the biggest blind
spot for people with low self-esteem
when it comes to how they're showing up
interpersonally tends to be that there
is a lack of awareness
around how you are impacting other
people and this is not at all
intentional so often when we grow up in
environments where we are not
particularly valued where maybe our
point of view is not considered very
heavily by the people around us to have
much worth to it or where maybe we are
bullied or picked on or otherwise
reflected back to ourselves as someone
whose experience of being alive is of
less value than others
we tend to come to believe that that is
the truth and that the things that we
say and do in the world have less impact
on other people than the things that
people around us say and do the problem
is that this is not true it's kind of
like the experience of believing that
you are 3T tall when you're actually 6
feet tall and then going around bumping
into a bunch of stuff looking behind you
and going oh that's broken but there's
no way I broke it because I'm only 3T
tall if we believe that we are only
emotionally or energetically 3T tall
anytime we hurt somebody or impact a
situation negatively and we look back
and see the chaos and destruction we're
likely to go couldn't have been me I'm
only 3T tall and so today we're going to
break down in more concrete terms what
this actually looks like and where those
blind spots tend to show up as well as
how we can start making ourselves aware
of all of the space that we might be
occupying inside of our relationships
and inside of other people's minds
without realizing it and the reason
we're going to go over all of this is
because it's going to eventually help us
develop a better more robust view of
ourselves and the ways that we're
showing up in the world that will end up
allowing us to approach our
relationships in more responsible ways
so we're going to go over three
manifestations of this the first one
we're going to talk about is that if you
have low self-esteem or low self-worth
you might be accidentally hurting the
people in your life by being indifferent
or kind of checked out in the areas
where they would actually appreciate
some proactive help or support from you
now once again when we have that idea of
ourselves as not having much to offer
what we don't instinctively do is go out
looking for the areas where other people
could benefit from our help or support
so if someone we love is going through a
challenging time we might genuinely
believe that it's more compassionate for
us to back off and give them space than
it is for us to show up and try to offer
care or support to them because we might
have this idea that any care or support
we could offer is not going to be very
good or it's not going to be very
fulfilling and it's probably just going
to feel like an annoying thing that they
feel the need to pretend is helpful
when in reality we might be missing
really big opportunities to care about
and show our support for the people
around us and because they might not see
us as 3et tall the same way we see
ourselves they may actually be feeling
hurt and a little bit rejected like why
is this person not showing up when I'm
in need is it because they don't care
about me is it because they're just a
fair weather friend or a fair weather
partner or whatever it is so there can
be this total missed opportunity where
we might actually care about someone and
want to help them and they might
actually want our help but because we
haven't developed that skill of
understanding and responding to other
people's emotional needs because we have
the belief that we are not capable of
doing that this can actually cause a lot
of rupture in our close relationships
unless and until we become aware of it
now I want to point out that this
Dynamic can actually work in insecurely
attached Dynamics but that's not to say
that it's healthy so you might have one
partner usually the one who airs more
avoidant in a mutually insecure
relationship who is very uncomfortable
receiving help and who does want to be
seen at all times as perfectly capable
of taking care of themselves and then
you might have another partner who is in
some ways very open to giving help but
who in large part doesn't really feel
comfortable seeing their partner as
anything other than invulnerable
and so that Dynamic can be very
comfortable but not necessarily mutually
beneficial on a deep level long term
because both partners are not fully
actualizing themselves and they're just
kind of covering for each other's weak
points unconsciously now in a secure
Dynamic there's a very natural flow
between giving and taking both people
feel as though their help is Meaningful
and they want to offer it and they also
feel as though their partner's help is
Meaningful and and they want to receive
it and so that's the place we ultimately
want to get to and we will talk near the
end of this video about how we can start
flipping these Dynamics around but for
now we're going to move on to the second
biggest blind spot of people who have
low
self-esteem which is the idea that you
cannot possibly hurt someone in a deep
way because there's no way that you
would matter enough to that person to do
that there is no way that the words you
say or the ACT you take could ever hit
someone hard enough to actually hurt
them and this is one that I see
frequently developing around people who
are raised in a more avoidant caregiving
Dynamic so if in your family of origin
people didn't really show when their
feelings were hurt and you didn't really
get feedback about how you were
impacting other people on an emotional
level you might think that anything you
say when you're frustrated is just kind
of falling on deaf ears people are
writing you off as irrational when in
fact you might be hurting other people
really deeply without realizing this and
to add a layer of complexity to this
there is this specific blind spot that
tends to arise when we have the I am not
okay negative view of self worldview the
danger of this worldview is that we have
a tendency to project it onto other
people so instead of just being very
aware that we are not thinking
particularly positively about ourselves
we're going to tell ourselves the story
that other people are constantly and
chronically judging us the same way we
are constantly and chronically judging
ourselves so when we walk around the
world with this belief that other people
are thinking ill of us that they're
judging us that they're seeing all the
things we hate about ourselves and they
are hating us for them what this gives
us is a not particularly charitable view
of other people and if if we are
responding to People based on that story
instead of the actual feedback they give
us we're actually going to be creating a
real Dynamic where we are getting
rejected so sometimes I see this come
online for people around certain types
of people or let's say certain genders
so let's say you have this idea that all
men are judging you all of the time and
being very critical in their heads all
of the time or all women whatever it is
now every time you walk into into a room
full of men you're walking into what you
are imagining to be a very hostile
environment so you're coming into that
environment on the defense you're
probably coming in with some closed off
defensive kind of hostile energy
yourself and so now the responses that
you get from people when you go interact
with them are probably not going to be
particularly warm and engaging because
they're responding to your energy and
that's it's just going to give you
confirmation when you're not getting
those warm engaging responses from
people that they are judgmental critical
and must be thinking ill of you when in
reality they might be responding to the
energy that you're coming in with so
this can become this self-fulfilling
prophecy that until we become aware of
it can really get in the way of us
having honest interactions with other
people and then to follow this example
we might see these people who were
projecting these negative traits onto
interacting differently with other
people so let's say now another woman
walks into this room and I perceive her
as being a lot cooler than me and she
walks up to people and she has this open
engaged energy so people are warm and
engaged with her in response but instead
of checking myself for how I'm coming
off I'm probably going to go see I knew
it people just want to hang out with
girls like her and because I'm not like
her nobody's ever going to want to be
around me the world is an unfair place
and I am always going to be judged based
on these superficial
things now I'm not saying that the world
does not have any people who judge
others on superficial things but if
you're unable to differentiate and to
develop good discernment around who is
judging you for superficial things or
for whatever it is that your low
self-esteem is based around and who is
not you're going to be walking around
projecting one thing onto everybody and
missing all of the deep opportunities to
connect that could be available to you
if you were not doing that projecting so
closer to the end of this video we're
going to talk more about how to do that
but for now we're going to get into the
third and final way that having low
self-esteem tends to create social blind
spots for you and this one is in the
realm of self advocacy when you have
have this intuitive belief that you've
been carrying around for the majority of
your life that your needs do not matter
and that nobody is going to want to
fulfill them what you naturally do not
do is advocate for your needs getting
met you might instead start behaving
angrily and passive aggressively when
other people are not meeting your needs
not realizing that those people might
not have any idea what your needs
actually are and this is something that
I think is particularly tricky when
insecurely attached people try to get
into a relationship of whatever form
with more secure people the secure
people because they are naturally aware
of their own needs and tend to ask for
what they want directly might assume
that if you are not stating your own
needs it's just because you're fine and
there's nothing in particular that
you're wanting help with but because you
might be operating from a different
script where the idea is that you give
hints about which of your needs need to
get met and then the other person's job
is to pick up on those hints and respond
to them you might start getting angry
and lashing out at people for not
meeting the needs that they have no idea
you are expecting to have met and so now
you might be behaving aggressively or
passive aggressively or in a kind of
cold or unkind way towards others when
they have no idea why you are doing that
and so they're going to interpret that
as a rejection and probably back off a
little bit and give you some space when
that is the opposite of what you're
actually wanting and needing so the less
we value our own needs the worse we're
going to be at asking to get them met in
a pro-social way instead we're just
going to be developing all of these
resentments and we're probably going to
start acting those out whether we intend
to or not so it's kind of a brain Bender
to realize that becoming aware of our
own needs and being clear and direct
about them is actually a a much more
pro-social thing than pushing them down
and pretending we don't have them it's
going to lend itself to healthier
relationships to Dynamics where nobody
feels like they're on edge or can't
figure out what's going on and so
there's actually an immense value for
other people in US recognizing and
voicing our needs but again this is
going to feel like a total upside down
world for those of us who grew up
insecurely attached or with low
self-esteem now for the rest of this
video we're going to move into how to
start healing these wounds and how to
start taking different actions that get
us more of those close- connected
relationships that we want and less of
these accidental messy projections that
are uncomfortable and difficult for
everybody to deal with so the kind of
turning point for all of this I feel
like can be summarized in one of my
favorite eart toll quotes which is
whatever you believe the world is
withholding from you you you are
withholding from the world so this idea
that if I feel like I'm just not getting
a lot of attention affection positive
reinforcement from other people it's
probable I'm not putting a lot of that
out into the world or if I am I'm not
doing it in a way that is truly
authentic and a true outflow of my own
appreciation maybe I'm doing it in kind
of a desperate cloying way because I
want it in return but that is a very
different energy to be in so we're going
to go through these three problems again
and start talking about their antidotes
so that first problem the problem of
feeling like our help isn't good enough
to help people what we're going to start
doing to counteract this one is start
getting as attuned as possible to the
people in our lives so getting really
present with people when they're going
through challenges asking them questions
instead of backing off as well as asking
them directly is there some type of help
that I can give you around this and an
even deeper level of this is being able
to be proactive with the people in our
lives about the help that they need from
us but once again doing that requires
deep
Attunement when our self-esteem is very
low it can actually be really
challenging to attune properly to people
because Attunement means being present
with them and open to whatever is coming
up inside of a given moment in our
relationship with them when we have low
self-esteem we're often preoccupied by
the thought does this person like me
what are they thinking about me right
now are they judging me all of these
thoughts that we think are about the
other person are actually about me me me
me me what type of validation am I
getting or not getting out of this
interaction and in order to really be
attuned to another person we have to
shut that part of ourselves off we have
to be willing to not worry for a little
bit whether or not this person is liking
us or approving of us and to just be
present with whatever they are showing
up with and whatever they are telling us
and the more we can practice this skill
of being with someone in the moment and
shutting off that internal script that's
wondering what they think of us the more
we're going to become aware of what this
person's unique ch challenges struggles
and opportunities to be given support
are and so we're going to get steadily
better at predicting areas where we
might be able to fulfill some need for
them without necessarily having to ask
super directly so this is the process of
getting attuned to the people in our
lives the next problem this problem of
going around believing that the way
we're behaving towards people is not
influencing our Dynamic with them to
start counteracting this one we need to
start checking in on our stories about
how people are something that's going to
be big here is first of all being
willing to look back at interactions we
had with people and really analyze what
we were bringing into that
interaction again this might be a very
big blind spot when we were talking to
this person instead of thinking about
how they were reacting to us try playing
that interaction back through their eyes
and be really aware of what you're
noticing about how you were showing up
in that interaction were you smiling at
them were you asking them questions
about themselves try to really start
getting inside of other people's minds
and developing an idea of how they're
perceiving you and how your energy and
what you're bringing to a situation
might be impacting the way that they are
responding to you and the other thing
we're going to need to start doing here
to counteract this is to start checking
the stories that we have about other
people or other groups of people so once
again let's say you have this idea that
all men are inherently
judgmental when we have trauma or early
wounding the brain tends to think in
very black and white terms and the
reason it does this is because it is
over assessing for risk so it's getting
rid of that maybe category in your brain
that allows you to think in Shades of
Gray and it's going if there is any risk
of this thing harming us it goes in the
bad category and then you're going to
start behaving as though that is true so
what we need to start doing here is
challenging that black and white
thinking the accurate statement is never
all men are critical and judgmental nor
is it all women are critical and
judgmental it is absolutely true that
some men and some women and some
non-binary people are critical and
judgmental however the art form lies in
figuring out how to tell which of those
types of people you're talking to so
what are some clues or some cues inside
of a person's Behavior Beyond this
generalized category that you have them
in that might indicate they are a very
judgmental person or not so once again
this is going to require some
backtracking and some intellectual
factchecking have there been instances
where you had someone in one category in
your brain and it turned out you were
wrong
what was the evidence that led you to
realizing you were wrong and how can you
log that as something to watch out for
in the future so this is the ongoing
process of developing discernment about
people also this needs to be done on an
individual level so you might have black
and white thinking about a particular
person and you might have this idea my
partner secretly hates me when in fact
your partner likes you quite a bit 95%
of the time and the other 5% of the time
yeah they feel angry but it passes
because like all human emotions things
come and go but if you have this belief
that people can only feel one thing
anytime your partner or someone gets in
that state where they don't like you
you're going to use that as confirmation
that you knew it all along and they
actually hate you full stop so once
again this is the process of allowing
your thinking to become less black and
white and making a lot of room for the
gray in between some people think like
this other people don't think like this
people can really like us most of the
time and also have certain times where
they just get frustrated with us if we
expect things to be all one way or
another as soon as we see the negative
thing the thing that our brain logs as a
risk we're going to latch on to that and
make it the entirety of our experience
and then once again we're going to be in
that negative Loop of projecting
outwards something that we believe to be
true about another person and showing up
as though it is true which gets us into
that negative feedback loop so we want
to be really careful here about
challenging our All or Nothing
assumptions when something happens how
do we stay really aware of the situation
or context we're in so that we do not
overgeneralize so this is the process of
recognizing the shortcuts that our brain
naturally takes because it's doing its
best to keep us safe and being
intentional about challenging some of
those assumptions and getting a more
accurate and detailed view of how other
people or individual relationships
manifest and another thing we want to do
in this process is just check ourselves
at various points in our interactions
with other people for congruence so if I
go up to someone and what I'm saying
with my words is very friendly maybe I'm
introducing myself and asking asking
them questions about themselves but the
energy I'm in is quite defensive
remember that people respond to us
primarily based on the energy that we're
giving off so even if we are saying all
of the right things to them if we come
in and our posture and our tone is just
kind of strange and doesn't match our
words we're probably going to be making
that other person quite uncomfortable so
we're not necessarily going to get the
warmest or most engaged response the art
of noticing when we are in some weird
energy is probably something that I will
make an entire other video around
because it's actually a very important
thing to keep aware of but for now we're
just going to note that the energy we're
coming in with matters in many cases
much more than the actual words that we
are saying to people and the last
Distortion that we're going to talk
about as well as how we can get more in
reality with it is that idea that other
people do not want to help us and that
our needs are not important what's
important to note here is that in Secure
relationships and in the world of
securely attached people people enjoy
helping each other it's part of the
inherent social contract everybody wants
to feel valuable and like they have
things they can offer to their loved
ones so just like in the first step of
this process we started getting attuned
to what other people needed from us our
work also becomes getting attuned to
what type of help people like to give
and then figuring out who we can go to
when we're having a particular need
arise who might actually be really happy
to help us and really grateful or
flattered that we're coming to them with
a problem so we're going to want to
notice things like where are my friends
or my partner or my family members
naturally showing up to help other
people that's probably the area where
they like to give help the next question
we're going to ask ourselves is do I
know how to ask for help in a way that
is complimentary to another person
rather than diminishing or insulting so
if the only way we know how to ask for
help is to criticize another person for
what they're not doing for us it's
likely that they're not feeling very
good when we're coming to them to ask
for things and we might actually be
pushing them away there is also an art
to pro-social asks for help so going to
someone and telling them that you really
appreciate let's say their perspectives
on a given an issue and would like to
know what they think of your problem is
a very pro-social way of asking for help
you're making the other person feel
valued and important as you're getting
your own need met once again going in
with the assumption that our needs are
unimportant and that we're
inconveniencing people by asking for
help puts us on the automatic defense
when we go into situations that we
really need help with going into
situations with the idea in our minds
that other people might be quite willing
to give us help allows us to approach it
in a totally different energy and this
once again is a skill that must be
learned but the more we work on
developing it the more we're able to get
at these really deep Mutual connections
where help is readily offered and
received otherwise known as secure
Dynamics all right I'm going to leave it
there for today on this topic as always
let me know what's coming up for you
guys as you go through this video any
thoughts feelings questions you have
please leave them in the comment section
below I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really
[Music]
soon