hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here if this is your first
time here you are in for a doozy of a
video today we are talking about the
concept of The Dark Night of the Soul
now this is a concept that predominantly
comes from kind of ancient spiritual and
philosophical traditions but that's been
interpreted by a lot of different
psychologists as the years go on so this
video is less straight up contemporary
psychology and more a blend of
philosophy with psychology over the ages
so one of the people who spoke about the
Dark Knight of the soul is Carl Young
who is someone we were also discussing
recently on this channel in a video that
I made about Shadow work so I will link
in the description of this video the
link to that video because if the term
Shadow work is new to you you might want
to go give that a watch first just so
you have some context for what we're
talking about today so once again The
Dark Knight of the soul is a concept
that many different spiritual teachers
have tackled over the years and my
favorite concise definition from it
comes from Eckhart Tolle who describes
the Dark Knight of the Soul as a
collapse of the perceived meaning in
life so the Dark Knight of the soul is
what happens when we are forced to
confront our shadow which means
confronting and reconciling with all of
the parts of ourselves that we have
consciously disidentified with what this
leads to is a crisis in identity and
we're going to talk more about what this
looks like in the middle of this video
but essentially when we Face our shadows
in a true sense what we're doing is
realizing that all of the things we
perceive to be deeply flawed or morally
wrong with other people or the world
also exist within us
and not only do those things exist
within us but we have been unconsciously
playing them out by virtue of the fact
that we have been repressing them and
causing pain to ourselves and others in
a way that goes against our own
conscious moral code so this leads to a
crisis in both our self-identity and our
sense of meaning because we all
understand and navigate the world
through a moral code that we internalize
for most of us from a very young age we
just add more sophisticated language to
it as we grow up we learn to identify
certain things as good and certain
things is bad and we act in alignment
with that which we perceive to be good
on a conscious level and repress any
impulses we have that we perceive to be
morally bad on an instinctual level so
for the majority of our lives our sense
of self-awareness is really an
observation of our ego so the parts of
our minds and our self-concept that are
conscious to us and that we are aware of
that's what we tend to be thinking about
when we're analyzing the self when we
are doing Shadow work we start to become
aware of the fact that the ego is not
the only part of who we are and in order
to proceed Through The Dark Night of the
soul and arrive on the other side where
we have integrated what's in our shadow
it is necessary for our systems of
meaning and morality to kind of collapse
in on themselves and for us to
eventually be able to expand our view of
both ourselves other people morality and
the nature of reality so again we're
going to get more into that as the video
goes on but for now what I want to talk
about is how this relates to attachment
so I believe that if we are doing
attachment work and I mean like really
doing attachment work not just trying to
find a few tools here and there for
making our relationships healthier we
are by definition doing Shadow work
because what it means to be insecurely
attached is to be psychologically
one-sided so to be leaving large swaths
of relevant information about attachment
relationships out of our conscious aware
awareness whether that means information
about ourselves and how we're showing up
which might go instinctively into a
blind spot or information about how
other people are impacting us and vice
versa so I think that if you are deeply
taking on the process of attachment
healing work it is extraordinarily
likely that you will encounter The Dark
Night of the Soul at some part in this
process to be doing true attachment
healing work is to be doing Shadow work
so let's take this kind of back to the
absolute Basics and spend a little time
getting a grasp on why attachment
healing work is so tied up with that
which we might consider spiritual in
nature and when I say spiritual I do not
mean religious what I mean when I say
spiritual is our individual and
Collective relationships with that which
we do not understand so with the kind of
existential void that is what happens
before and after life all of us have to
find ways of grappling with the fact
that we are mortal that we and everyone
we love will someday die and our
attachment relationships are deeply
intertwined with how we process that
information so when we are infants our
primary attachment figures which is
whoever our caregivers are are the
people who are responsible for managing
our relationship with our own existence
and this is true both in a literal sense
so it's our parents jobs to make sure
that we are fed and that we aren't
falling off any High pieces of furniture
that we've managed to climb up but they
are also responsible for managing our
relationships with existence and the
concept of death on an emotional level
so here's what I mean by that when you
are a baby and you feel something like
pain or hunger or extreme discomfort
that you don't understand in your body
the only thing you can do is show your
emotions and hope that somebody is going
to come along competently assess what
you need and give it to you so you feel
this kind of existential distress
creeping in and the way that your parent
most often responds when you express
feelings that arise from a place of
existential distress or anxiety sets the
stage for how as an adult you will deal
with the same feelings now as an adult
we experience existential distress quite
a bit less often than babies do at least
on a conscious level for most of us not
all but most of us we are not in Daily
fear of dying but what does tend to
trigger feelings of existential distress
are things like perceiving loss so
imagining that we might lose someone we
love either to death or to some sort of
rupture in the relationship that we
might lose a thing we love like a job or
a particular time period in our lives
that we're really happy in there are
little deaths that are very inherent to
being alive and are attachment
orientation determines how we are going
to cope with those losses when they come
up so if I have a secure attachment
system because as a baby when those
existential threats arose for me I was
more often than not met with the
appropriate it responds within an
appropriate time period I'm likely to
have a fairly relaxed relationship with
existential distress as an adult so when
something in my life is coming to an end
when a friendship is ending when I am
moving somewhere when someone I love
dies I know how to access the true pain
of what is happening and I know how to
soothe myself around it and or lean on
the people around me to get through that
distress but if we had to develop an
alternative strategy for managing our
existential distress as babies because
our caregivers were not adequately
responsive to us in one direction or
another it's highly likely that the
strategy we developed for either
mitigating our own distress or
amplifying our own distress in order to
elicit protection and comfort from
others those strategies end up becoming
our system of morality as we grow up so
if you are a young child and the only
way you can communicate is through
sharing your feelings and you learn that
some times I get responded to
appropriately when I share my feelings
of distress but other times my
caregivers don't seem to notice or seem
to take a very long time to attend to me
what you learn is that I need to hone in
on these feelings of existential
distress as much as I can and really
amplify them so that people become aware
that I need something and so what tends
to naturally crop up as an adult is that
feeling of panic stress and the need to
alert someone to your panic in distress
so that they can soothe you because this
is the model that you have internalized
based on what worked to keep you alive
and mitigate that existential distress
for you from a very very young age now
for those on the avoidant side of the
spectrum what often happened is that
your physical needs may have been met
when you were young but your emotional
needs were likely relatively
consistently not met in an adequate
sense and so what the brain naturally
learns to do in order to stay in
connection with the caregiver which is
vital for survival at a young age was to
kind of numb out the feelings of pain
that are associated with certain
emotional states because if you can
disregard those feelings in your own
mind it means that you will not express
the appropriate emotions around them
Ergo you will not upset your caregiver
who may not be able to handle you
expressing emotions around anything
other than direct physical needs and
then as an adult what happens when
something goes wrong in life and that
kind of existential dread creeps into
your world view you find ways to numb
out dissociate or disconnect from that
pain without even realizing you are
doing it so all of this is to say our
early attachment systems and the way
that they wire us early on in life set
the stage for how we will deal with
existential distress so the threat of
loss in any capacity when we are adults
so most of us as we go through life have
these instinctive feelings of what the
right thing to do is and what the wrong
thing to do is and the reason those
things feel so instinctual are because
they are probably the things that kept
you in the good graces of the people who
were caring for you in your early
environment and so they quite literally
come from an instinctual place so if
from a young age I learned that the
thing that keeps me in the good graces
of my caregivers is repressing my
vulnerable emotions and not burdening
other people with my negative feelings
then I start to believe as I grow up
that is the right good and moral thing
to do one should always deal with their
own problems not burden other people and
people who do play the victim and burden
other people you might judge as morally
bad or or pathetic in some capacity and
on the flip side if what consistently
worked for you growing up was amplifying
and focusing in and sharing your
emotions with others you might start to
instinctively feel that co-regulation
and sharing vulnerably with people is
always the right and good and moral
thing to do and those who repress and
deny their emotions and don't connect
emotionally with others are the people
who you might see as morally bad in some
capacity so to be insecurely attached by
definition is to have a one-sided
experience of our own psychology and
morality this is not intentional and we
do not choose it however by definition
of what it means to be insecurely
attached we are omitting large swaths of
information that is relevant to
attachment relationships as we go
through life so that could be on the
anxious side of the spectrum ways in
which we are actually capable of
self-regulating and meeting our own
needs or on the avoidant side of the
spectrum it could be ways in which we
are actually quite quite weak vulnerable
and in need of help from others but the
important part here is that those things
exist in our shadow we are not
consciously aware of those needs we are
not consciously aware of the things that
we are omitting from our own moral code
that we use to navigate the world and
often we don't truly have to face any of
that until for some reason or another we
end up encountering our shadow often
what leads people to do Shadow work at
whatever point in their life is because
they reach a point where they realize
that their lives are not working and the
parts of their lives that are causing
the problem are emerging from a
psychological blind spot and if we are
lucky and I truly mean this because it
gives us the chance to reorganize our
worldview into a secure one if we take
it we are able to recognize that some
aspect of the way that we've been
existing in the world and the moral code
as we hold it includes an accidental
outward projection of the exact opposite
of what we believe we want to be putting
into the world so let's talk in more
concrete terms about what that means
according to Young every time there is a
one-sided action that is taken at the
directive of the conscious mind which is
a fancy way of saying every time we do
something that is motivated by the
conscious thought of let's say this and
only this is the right thing to do there
is a counteraction that occurs in the
shadow so if I identify in my conscious
mind as a people pleaser or as a person
who always sacrifices what I want for
others I might have something that I
actually want quite badly for myself but
my system of morality that I've
consciously constructed based on what
worked to keep me reasonably safe and
protected as a child if that system of
morality dictates that I must always put
others needs ahead of my own what I
might consciously do is acquiesce to the
needs of others but the rage that I
might feel in my body that my conscious
mind tells me it is not okay to feel
because a good person would not feel
anger at putting others needs above
their own that anger goes into my shadow
or let's say that I have the world view
that I must always be strong and
invulnerable so that I do not put my
needs on other people so every time I
take an action that is motivated by that
system of morality the true fear and
vulnerability and need for comfort that
I feel in that scenario gets projected
into my shadow when something is in our
shadow it means that we now have a need
we are experiencing that we are not
consciously aware of so if I have a
whole bunch of vulnerability and sadness
and grief in my shadow because my
conscious mind tells me I'm a tough
person I'm resilient I don't feel pain
over Petty things that pain still wants
to exist in the world it wants to see
itself actualized so if somebody hurts
me in a relationship and I can't admit
even to myself that I'm hurt what I'm
going to do is start finding ways
unconsciously to start putting that
person down to make them feel lesser
than and to get them to act out the pain
that I am unable to to access
consciously in myself so by denying my
own woundedness I end up finding ways to
get other people to act out that
woundedness for me without me realizing
I am doing that and the same can be said
of let's say people pleasing if I am
consciously putting aside what I want
and giving someone else what they want
and I'm unable to recognize even to
myself that I'm angry about that I might
end up behaving in passive aggressive
ways without even being aware that I'm
doing that and what happens when we
behave passive aggressively for long
enough eventually the other person tends
to get angry and frustrated and so now
the anger that we repressed into our
shadow is being acted out by the other
person who we are behaving passive
aggressively towards so again our anger
has found a way to exist in the world
because we have projected it outward and
kind of given it to someone else to act
out by virtue of the fact that we are
repressing it so this is kind of deep
into the field of transactional analysis
which looks at how people make
adaptations based on how each one is
showing up in the relationship but very
often when we have a lot of repressed
stuff in our shadow we end up being
partnered with people or being very
close to people who act out that which
is in our shadow and this can be a key
indication if you feel like you keep
dating the same types of people over and
over again who have behavior that you
absolutely abhor that that type of
behavior is the thing you have to
confront in your own shadow if you want
to stop encountering it in other people
now I want to be really clear what I am
not saying is you are causing
everybody's behavior and nobody has any
autonomy over their own behavior but
often even if that projection process
isn't completely happening we very often
feel drawn to those who have the traits
that we repress in ourselves and then
later on we might end up hating them for
those exact traits that are just a
different expression of that which
instinctively Drew us to them now a lot
of people never encounter a crisis of
meaning as a result of this many people
go through life having a ton of
projections getting really angry at
other people for the traits that they
have disidentified with inside of
themselves and in many capacities
finding a way to kind of set up a life
for themselves where they don't have to
confront that which is in the shadow but
for a variety of potential reasons other
people end up having to confront their
Shadow and facing the Dark Knight of the
Soul so something that kind of
kick-started the Shadow work process for
myself was when I had what I now see as
the gift but it did not feel like a gift
at the time of meeting my own shadow
very deeply inside of somebody else so
for the majority of my young life my
worldview was one of self-responsibility
I was raised in a very traditionally
German household where the most noble
thing you could do was suck up your own
feelings not put them on anybody else
and if you had a strong feeling that was
not directly tied to some sort of very
practical or physical threat the kind
thing to do was to accept that you were
being irrational to shove that feeling
down and to not put it on anybody else
now this world view was one that I
inherited from my parent who inherited
it from their parent and there was never
a conscious decision made at any point
in my lineage that I am aware of that
this was the right way to be it was just
what I internalized because it was what
generations of people before me and my
family had also internalized and passed
down believing they were teaching proper
morals to their children so when I grew
up I would frequently try to have close
relationships with people only to become
offended and frustrated when they would
express any strong negative emotions
they had that weren't directly related
to their survival needs I would be like
look I'm over here doing all of the hard
work of keeping myself emotionally
regulated by recognizing that when a
strong feeling comes up that isn't tied
to one of my survival needs I'm being
irrational and I expect everybody else
to be doing the same and if they don't
I'm going to let them know that I think
they're being irrational and that all
this kind of drama they're creating
around their emotions isn't good for
them or for me or for a relationship
because again that was opposite to my
own moral code and of course the problem
here is that when we are insecurely
attached and we are one-sided in some
capacity when it comes to our moral code
we tend to get close to people who are
one-sided in the opposite way so I was
over here going the right thing to do is
to suppress your emotions and not
express them and then I would find
someone who believed that the right
thing to do was always express and
co-regulate around your feelings no
matter how intense they are and without
a lot of regard for how the way you're
expressing your emotions impacts the
other person so it was generally really
easy for both me and whoever I was close
with to point at each other and go you
are the problem and in every case we
were both right both of our systems of
morality were missing something crucial
however I wanted to get off the
Merry-Go-Round and I didn't know how yet
so I figured what if I just date someone
who's exactly like me what if I get
close to another person who like myself
believes in total self-responsibility
believes that we are all completely
responsible for our own feelings and
reactions and who for the most part sees
large dramatic displays of emotion as
childish and unnecessary so the universe
granted me with someone who had a very
similar cultural background to me a very
similar internal set of morals around
solving all of one's emotional problems
oneself and I started to feel absolutely
insane being close to this person when I
would Express something like pain or
distress over something they had said to
me and got the kind of response in
return that I would often give to others
implying that I was being irrational I
started to log just how painful that
felt and this I want to be clear is one
of two experiences you could have often
on the other side of the spectrum when
an anxious person meets someone who
becomes more anxiously attached to them
than vice versa there's a feeling of
disgusting contempt that comes very
quickly online because again and you are
seeing yourself mirrored in that other
person and when we have ourselves
mirrored back to ourselves in this way
when we have what I believe is truly the
opportunity to meet the energy that we
approach the world with in another
person and notice how we are affected by
that we are being given the opportunity
to understand and experience the shadow
that we are casting on the world often
completely unknowingly and we can take
such an opportunity and do one of two
things we can decide once again that the
problem is 100 the other person find
ways to convince ourselves actually I'm
nothing like them and go on our merry
way and choose different people who
don't force us to confront ourselves in
that same way to be close with or we can
do the hard work whether we stay in
relationship with that other or not of
admitting to ourselves that if I am
showing up in the same way this person
is and the way that this person is
showing up is causing me immense pain to
interface with I I must be causing
others and myself that same pain without
recognizing it even though the actions
that I'm taking that are leading to this
are things that I've always believed to
be the morally correct actions now I'm
faced with counter evidence and what you
do in the face of that counter evidence
determines whether you will confront
Your Shadow or continue to go on
behaving the way you've always behaved
and casting it onto the world if you
choose the path of confronting Your
Shadow it is highly likely you're going
to experience a Dark Night of the Soul
so your systems of morality and how you
make sense of the world and what you
believe to be the right way to navigate
the world as well as your personal sense
of identity so the person you believe
yourself to be the traits you believe
yourself to have and the traits you
believe yourself to absolutely not have
are going to collapse in on themselves
if I believe that denying my own
vulnerability remaining resilient and
rejecting of the parts of myself that
are weak and needy is the right thing to
do and then I learn that those weak
needy parts of myself are actually
things I am accidentally projecting left
right and center and putting out into
the world I now have to face the fact
that by consciously disidentifying with
parts of myself I am accidentally
creating more of that thing in the world
in a less healthy way
same goes from the opposite side of the
spectrum if I believe that foregoing my
own wants and needs and only catering to
what other people want to need is the
absolute most moral way to exist in the
world and then I learned that actually
my own disowned wants needs fears
anxieties that come up are being felt
Second Hand by my partner and they are
starting to feel responsible for
caretaking me around that I'm actually
creating more unhappiness for them by
not owning what I want than I would be
if I simply set some boundaries and
found ways to get what I want for myself
in the first place rather than pushing
them under the rug and then my partner
having to indirectly grapple with them
down the line but here's the cool thing
about the Dark Night of the Soul For the
First Time In Our Lives if we came to it
from a place of insecure attachment we
are being offered the opportunity to see
reality clearly
the defining characteristic of insecure
attachment is that there are significant
distortions in your worldview when it
comes to the way you look at attachment
relationships which is a clinical way of
saying in some way you are not in touch
with reality between yourself and the
existential void of pain and anxiety you
have placed a whole bunch of stories and
distortions that have kept you from
seeing the nature of reality clearly
When we arrive in reality we understand
the way that those who were raised
secure naturally understand that all of
us have the entire emotional Spectrum
available to us and almost every day we
feel the entire range of the emotional
Spectrum just not consciously every
single one of us feels anger more or
less daily every single one of us feels
vulnerable and weak and needy pretty
much daily every single one of us feels
lustful and like there are things we
deeply want just for ourselves on a
pretty much daily basis all of these
feelings that we may have almost no
conscious awareness of are nonetheless
happening for us every single day and
there is a very simple explanation as to
why that is happening because our
biology is oriented towards survival
right there is no moral flaw in feeling
any of the thing things we feel now of
course there are certain feelings we
might choose not to act on because it
would not be pro-social and by
pro-social I mean it would not allow us
to exist in harmony with other beings so
if I feel murderous rage owning that
impulse does not mean I go commit murder
it could just mean owning that I feel
really angry and what I choose to do
with that anger is a different story but
where the real problems come into play
is when we try to convince ourselves
that we don't have these feelings we
have in the first place whether those
feelings are anger Joy disgust rage
selfishness vulnerability all of us have
the entire gamut that's just what it is
to be human and the feelings that we
have are natural responses to being
alive so feeling anything is not a moral
failing it's just a natural biological
response to our environments and for a
lot of us it takes deeply confronting
our shadow to actually understand that
and to be able to finally see ourselves
in an undistorted way
now when young talks about the Dark
Knight of the Soul he talks about a
point where you realize that all of
these projections you've been putting
out into the world you now have to reign
in and recognize that these are all
reflections of states and emotions that
exist inside of you the super strong
super resilient tough guy has to
recognize his own weakness lest he
endlessly projected outwards and force
other people to act it out for him the
people pleaser has to acknowledge their
own selfishness and their own wants and
desires lest they endlessly project
those things outwards and inadvertently
make other people responsible for
satisfying their unfulfilled needs for
them the Deep irony of Shadow work is
that by recognizing what it is we have
repressed and neglected in ourselves we
actually become more morally
well-rounded people through the
integration of those things but first it
can feel like a total disorientation of
our identity our sense of self and our
sense of morality like Eckhart Tolle
describes it a collapse of the perceived
meaning of life the old map that we had
for navigating the world no longer
applies and we have to figure out a new
one there's a quote by Cheryl Strayed
that I absolutely love that goes it is
impossible for you to go on as you were
before so you must go on as you never
have and I think that this is such an
apt quote for navigating The Dark Knight
of the Soul once we see that all of
these things we've been projecting
outward into the world and hating and
scorning and judging other people for
doing and feeling and expressing are the
things that we have been repressing
inside of ourselves we cannot unsee that
there is not a way back into our old
patterns of judgment and coping and
moralizing we have to develop a new
moral code a new means of understanding
the world and a new way of integrating
both our logical rational invulnerable
selves and are sensitive vulnerable
emotional ones another phenomenal young
quote that fits this occasion is the
quote where wisdom Reigns there is no
conflict between thinking and feeling if
I'm angry it's probably because I
perceive some sort of threat or boundary
violation and it serves me to pay
attention to that anger and use it as
information about where I need to be
setting my boundaries if I feel
vulnerable and hurt that is probably
giving me good information about some
sort of care support or soothing that
I'm in need of and I can use that
information to figure out which types of
relationships I can invest in where that
type of mutual support is a normal part
of it sometimes that might mean
confronting the ways in which I am
hurting other people and these kind of
cycles of hurt that I have not been able
to recognize my own role in prior to
this point but now I can and so I can
actually get down to the bottom in a
real way of why things are playing out
the way that they are doesn't mean every
relationship is going to get salvaged
but it does mean our Clarity increases
tenfold we no longer have to make
everybody else wrong to feel like we are
okay when they are behaving in a way
that we would not behave so to bring
this back to attachment for a minute one
of the ongoing education classes that
I'm currently taking is teaching me to
code adult attachment interviews so to
take an adult attachment and interview
and to be able to discern which
attachment strategy that person is
employing by analyzing the language that
they use and a kind of tidbit I found
fascinating within this course was that
one of my professors made a comment kind
of offhandedly at one point that it's
not uncommon for people who are in the
attachment healing process so who are in
the process of moving from an insecure
world view towards a secure one to
experience a period of depression in
relation to their view of attachment
relationships now two things this
doesn't mean one it doesn't mean that
everybody is going to experience that
and two it doesn't mean that your
depression pervades every area of your
life this is specific to the way that
people view attachment relationships and
the reason this happens why you might
move through this period of depression
in your thinking about attachment
relationships as you're in the healing
process it's because there's a specific
point where you're able to kind of see
your own shadow you reach a point where
you're able to see clearly all of these
things that you're doing that are not
getting you the closeness and the
intimacy or the ability to navigate the
world completely independently of close
attachment Relationships by using the
strategy you've always used so you might
reach a point where essentially you see
your own patterning laid out clearly you
understand that it is not going to get
you what you want and yet you don't yet
have the secure skills you need to start
behaving differently so it can feel kind
of hopeless like I no longer know who I
am or how I can show up in relationships
in a way that gets me what I want and
maybe I even see now the ways in which
I'm contributing to my own misery but I
have not yet developed whatever skills I
need to do something differently so this
period of depression can be a normal
stage in the healing process and What
needs to come next is that confrontation
and integration of the Shadow which
starts with accepting that you can no
longer go on as you were if I truly
accept that there is no way for me to
completely numb out the pain that is
inherent to being a mortal being who
experiences loss and the threat of loss
in life and I know that I cannot elicit
a perfect savior who will come along and
forever abolish my distress what would I
need to learn to do instead so there is
a spiritual teacher named Michael
Beckwith who I was watching a video of
the other day and he was saying if you
are experiencing The Dark Night of the
soul the most fruitful question you can
ask yourself is the question if this
experience were to last forever what
quality would have to emerge for me to
have peace of mind
so this kind of flips the framing of how
do I avoid this pain on its head and
instead it goes look you are here in
this place where for the first time you
are understanding that no one is coming
to save you and you cannot numb out your
feelings of pain forever life is
inherently uncertain constantly in flux
people in our lives relationships
situations come and go and there's
really not much we can do to control all
that or to pretend that we don't feel
the pain of it now the opportunity that
we've been given is to learn the skills
of accepting that that is the true
nature of reality and learning to cope
with it by accessing our entire
emotional range so for a lot of people
this might look like taking on some new
philosophy or finding new teachers or
mentors or communities who can help them
develop the skills that are necessary
for embracing the chaotic nature of life
without going absolutely mad so the
question becomes if I am in this Dark
Night of the soul and it kind of feels
like I am lost in the wilderness instead
of fixating on how I find my way out how
do I accept that I'm here and that this
unknown Wilderness this existential void
that I've unconsciously been trying to
escape my awareness of for my entire
life is now my home
what skills do I need to make this home
feel like a place that I would want to
live in if I don't know how to deal with
my feelings of vulnerability now that I
have them in my conscious awareness who
might be able to teach me how to deal
with those if I don't know how to deal
with my anger or my rage what type of
help could I elicit that might guide me
in the right direction how do I develop
the tools for dealing with reality as it
is rather than continuing to distort it
and tell myself stories about myself in
the world that are largely one-sided in
nature and this is both how we navigate
Through The Dark Night of the soul and
how we heal our attachment systems we
find that blend between dignity and
humility and we learn to live there and
like anything this is a long process
that we will in some part be engaging
with for the rest of our lives but I
want to be clear to arrive here is
absolutely a gift because it gives us
the opportunity to have a life full of
deep meaningful experience and
connections because they are all
grounded in what's true okay I think I'm
going to end this video there for today
because it is getting quite lengthy but
as always leave any thoughts feelings
perspectives whatever is coming up for
you in the comments section I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children and I will see you back here
again really soon
foreign
[Music]