hey guys heidi preeb here welcome back
to my channel today i wanted to make a
video on something that was kind of a
huge aha moment for me in my
understanding of trauma
and before we get started i want to be
clear that i am not a trauma therapist i
am a master's student in the field of
attachment theory so most of what i am
educated on formally when it comes to
trauma is trauma through the lens of
attachment theory
so today that's mostly what i'm going to
be talking about but i want to just
start out by making it clear that
what i'm talking about today is not the
one universal definition of trauma there
are many different definitions of trauma
many different ways we look at trauma
many different types of trauma right
there is ptsd there's cptsd there's
chronic trauma there is many different
forms that trauma can take but today i'm
going to be talking about a definition
that i found really helpful in my own
understanding
and it came to me through studying
attachment theory so i'm studying
something in my master's program called
the dynamic maturation model of
attachment and what you basically need
to know about the dynamic maturation
model for now is that it is similar but
not identical to the original model of
attachment so in the original model you
have anxious avoidant secure and fearful
avoidant attachment styles in the dmm
you have 22 different attachment
strategies so instead of looking at the
person as having an attachment style
which kind of in theory permeates
through a lot more of their being
the dmm looks at which strategies you
use so which organized sets of tools you
use to keep people close to you and they
call these attachment strategies there's
22 of them in a long series of other
videos i will tell you guys way more
about the dmm but what i think is
particularly interesting is how the dmm
defines trauma
so i am learning to code adult
attachment interviews using the dmm
model
and when you're coding adult attachment
interviews to figure out which strategy
someone is using they teach you to look
for unresolved trauma and i found the
definition of resolved versus unresolved
trauma super interesting and wanted to
share it
so basically in the dmm community
unresolved trauma is considered
incomplete learning and i want to be
very clear that this video is not a
your trauma made you stronger video
that's not the kind of learning i'm
talking about
what i mean is that basically trauma is
looked at through the lens of this
theory as a really physiologically
overwhelming event that you haven't been
able to properly contextualize and
integrate into the rest of your
understanding and that's what defines it
as traumatic so a really big question
that comes up a lot for people is why
can the same event happen to two people
and for one person it's traumatic and
for another it isn't and the answer to
that is usually that the person who was
not traumatized by the event was able to
properly understand
contextualize it and feel as though they
are going to be able to protect
themselves from that same situation
happening in the future so when you feel
like you have enough information about
why a certain negative overwhelming
event happened and you feel reasonably
certain that you'll be able to prevent a
similar thing from happening in the
future
that's
likely to be when you resolve that event
so you no longer have to be kind of
continuously preoccupied with it and you
no longer have to have these extreme
responses to it in situations where it
doesn't make sense because you've been
able to understand the sequence of
events that led to that happening as
well as which protective measures you
can make to prevent it from happening in
the future with a reasonable degree of
certainty right none of us are a hundred
percent in control of our lives but
where we have unresolved trauma and
where trauma tends to live in the body
very actively for a long period of time
is when we have events that happen to us
that we didn't understand that we lacked
the full context for and so our bodies
and our brains unconsciously learned
okay i don't really understand what
happened here so then one of two things
happens as a result we either become
preoccupied with the trauma or we
dismiss the trauma and both of these are
considered unresolved forms of trauma so
i'm going to use a simple example to
explain the difference between a
preoccupied and a dismiss trauma and
these are not the only types of trauma
these are just the two main types that
we look out for as kind of big common
types of trauma that you might have at
least in the attachment world and that
doesn't mean that these events had to be
attachment related right if you're
suddenly held up at gunpoint one day
that has very little to do with
attachment but your response is likely
to be some sort of post-traumatic stress
disorder response unless let's say you
live in a dangerous area where you
frequently get held up at gunpoint and
you know which streets you can walk down
that are safer and less safe and one
night you walk down a less safe street
and you predict it you might get held up
at gunpoint and then you did and it was
by someone who had held you up at
gunpoint before and you knew that you
probably weren't gonna die because this
is just larry the guy who robs people at
the end of this street right because you
have all the context around that
situation it's possible something even
as traumatic as getting held up at
gunpoint might not be a trauma for you
because you had all of the information
and you were able to predict why that
happened and how to not get held up in
the future and you were also probably in
that completely fake situation that i
made up reasonably sure that you weren't
going to get killed because this guy had
held you up three times before at
gunpoint right so the only reason i give
that example is to show that an event in
context can be not traumatizing whereas
the same event lacking context can be
extremely traumatizing and i also wanted
to talk about the fact that we're not
just talking about attachment stuff here
but
interpersonal trauma is absolutely
a thing that happens to many of us if
you have an insecure attachment style a
lot of people with insecure attachment
of any type
identify with having a lot of complex
ptsd symptoms which is what happens when
you have repetitive interpersonal trauma
in a relationship so a series of
threatening or psychologically damaging
events that are
not properly contextualized for you that
happen over and over and over again in
your life tends to result in cptsd so
again there's different types of trauma
and what i'm going to talk about today
kind of touches on a lot of different
types so
if you have a preoccupied trauma
generally what that means is that you
haven't learned enough information about
how to prevent that event in the future
because you aren't really sure what led
to it in the past so this can lead you
to feeling like you have to be
perpetually alert to anything
that might indicate that this thing is
going to happen again and often you are
letting in way too much data to be
considered as possible threats so i'm
going to use a simple example i'm going
to say that someone has been traumatized
interpersonally through let's say they
learned that their partner had had an
affair and again being cheated on
traumatic for some people not traumatic
for others it's all about context but
let's say someone had a house and three
children with their spouse and then they
one day learned that their spouse had
been sleeping with someone else for a
year behind their back and now they are
suddenly leaving them for this other
person is that potentially traumatic to
the attachment system absolutely
absolutely so if this person let's call
them jill jill was cheated on by their
partner if jill never understands the
context of what led to her partner
cheating on her she might become hyper
vigilant to the idea that it could
happen again in future relationships and
so the next time she starts dating the
next time she gets into a serious
relationship she might be on chronic
high alert for any little sign that her
partner might be disloyal to her and she
might be looking everywhere so she might
be thinking okay if they don't text me
back it's probably because they're
cheating on me if they look a little bit
nicer one day it might be because
they're cheating on me if they have a
lot of friends who are women it probably
means they're cheating and the problem
with this type of reasoning is that when
you have a preoccupied trauma it's often
because you are lacking the proper
context for what led to the sequence of
events happening that led to the
traumatic event so in jill's case she
probably doesn't have the real
information about why her partner
cheated so there are a variety of
reasons why her partner may have cheated
right maybe it had to do with their
relationship maybe her partner was very
unhappy in their relationship maybe they
no longer had a fulfilling sex life or
had the emotional intimacy that they
once had and maybe that drove her
partner into the arms of someone else or
maybe her partner was a psychopath and
was just chronically cheating on
everyone their entire lives right but if
you don't have the information about the
sequence of events that led up to a
traumatic event you become hyper
vigilant to anything that your mind
could possibly think of that might cause
it again in the future this is what we
call preoccupied trauma where basically
you are looking at too many things as
potential indications of future danger
because you don't have the proper
context for what led to that danger
happening in the past
now you can also have something called
dismiss trauma
so dismiss trauma is when you
essentially omit the entire traumatic
event from emotional processing and
drastically downplay the conscious
thought that it's going to happen again
in the future at all
so this would look like if jill's
partner had cheated on her and then she
decided okay i'm just gonna do what
needs to be done i'm gonna move out i'm
gonna take the kids i'm gonna go forward
with my life and you know what i'm good
i'm okay i'll get through it there's no
need for me to dwell on this i'm just
going to move on which is for many a
very common response to traumatic events
as is preoccupation but the problem with
this is that this will leave the
individual with a numbed out set of
emotions surrounding the traumatic event
so jill might suddenly find that she is
not attracted to anybody she has no
interest in dating no interest in
forming a close intimate connection with
someone no interest in moving through
the pain of what happened to her and
learning from it and going forward in a
different way she wants to forget the
whole thing happen and subsequently she
buries the entire range of emotions she
had around her old partnership both the
negative ones and the positive ones and
moves forward in a more numbed out way
so i was reading this book the other day
on sexual anorexia which is essentially
people who
refrain from sexual intimacy and who
don't necessarily feel
the desire to be close to other people
in a sexual way like
kind of like your sexual system just
turning off i can recommend some books
on this if you relate to that because i
read some really good stuff on it and
this is not the same as being asexual so
often people who go through periods of
sexual anorexia it happens after they
experience a betrayal in a sexual
relationship and i thought yeah that
tracks really neatly with this concept
of dismissed trauma so if you had a
sexual relationship with someone who you
felt really close to who you had a high
degree of trust and intimacy with and
then that trust and intimacy was
betrayed assuming obviously in this
example that you were monogamous then
dismissing that trauma is likely to
result in you feeling kind of numbed out
to any future situations where sexual or
emotional intimacy are on the table
because you have to bury the entire set
of feelings that you had around that
thing
and as such you're now going to be out
of touch with yourself and your own
needs and your own wants in this
particular area of your life until you
deal with the pain of that original
trauma so neither of these are great
outcomes obviously with preoccupied
trauma you are on high alert kind of
chronically trying to figure out how you
can prevent this from happening again
because you don't know why it happened
in the first place
and with preoccupied trauma there's kind
of this idea
not consciously but like your
unconscious thinks that you can still
change the past
like there is this part of you that's
still kind of going okay if i can
prevent this from happening again in the
future somehow the past is going to
reverse itself and this trauma will
unhappen
and again that won't be a conscious
thought that you have but it's going to
be what your body is kind of trying to
chronically work out is like how do i
make this unhappen and with dismissed
trauma what your body is trying to do is
protect you from ever feeling the pain
of what happened and in order to heal
from both of these types of trauma what
has to happen is we have to
face the full entire spectrum of what
happened understand both the sequence of
events that led to it as well as the
emotional impact that it had on us and
we have to be able to integrate both
sides of that in order to move forward
in a way that allows us to protect
ourselves in a realistic way from having
a similar thing happen again in the
future now of course we can't predict
the future right no one can do that with
100 accuracy but
someone who let's say had been cheated
on in the past and it turned out the
reason they were cheated on was because
in their marriage they both ended up
feeling very lonely and unfulfilled
now has real information that might help
them
form a healthier more connected marriage
the next time around so that it's much
less likely they're going to get to that
place where one person starts looking
elsewhere so a big part of resolving
trauma is understanding the sequence of
events that led to the traumatic event
happening
and on the flip side with dismissed
trauma a person who tells themselves the
story what happened had absolutely no
effect on me emotionally is at high risk
of walking right back into the exact
same situation or a very similar
situation
not seeing any of the warning signs and
having it happen all over again because
they aren't even conscious of the fact
that it hurt them so until that pain
gets brought into the body and processed
and acknowledged they're at high risk of
putting themselves right back in another
similar dangerous situation because
they're telling themselves this is not
dangerous because they literally don't
feel the pain that is usually there to
alert us to the fact that we're in
danger physically or emotionally so this
idea that trauma is incomplete learning
is the idea that every time we have a
traumatic event happen what makes it
traumatic is the fact that we really did
not expect it to happen and we felt
highly threatened by it either
emotionally or physically and a lot of
the time people like to talk about
trauma as only something that threatens
your physical life right so there's kind
of a dispute over like what do we
classify as trauma and what don't we any
event where your life is in danger
especially if it's unexpected is likely
to be traumatic but also the human drive
to reproduce is pretty much the second
strongest drive we have after our drive
to stay alive right we want to stay out
of danger we want to protect ourselves
and as soon as those conditions are met
for most of us this really intense
sexual drive comes online and that's
just straight biology like our species
has continued for as long as it has
because we have these sexual drives that
drive us to go out and connect and
reproduce and like whether or not you're
actually reproducing through sex your
body doesn't know right your body thinks
every time you're having sex like ooh
maybe i'm gonna be reproducing through
this um on like a biological level right
which is why sexual trauma often has as
big an impact on us as traumatic
incidents in which our lives were
threatened whether it's assault or any
type of betrayal from someone who is a
romantic attachment partner that is
really disregulating for the system
right because one of our strongest
drives is to have attachment partners to
help us raise the next generation our
bodies and our emotional systems are
literally wired for us to want to seek
that out that's often why we have all
these really really intense emotions
that come up around attachment
relationships because our bodies are
trying to secure an attachment partner
for us to have safe consensual
reproductive sex with and then raise
children and keep that partner close and
again it literally doesn't matter if
you've consciously decided not to do any
of that with your life your biology
doesn't know that so it's very easy to
be traumatized by interpersonal
betrayals is pretty much all i'm saying
there so again in either case you're
never going to have all of the
information that you need to make a
hundred percent sure that something is
not going to happen again in the future
but we consider trauma resolved when you
have enough information to feel calm in
the fact that you're going to be able
with reasonable accuracy to predict in
the future when such an event is going
to happen again which means looking at
the past event as complete
looking at it as something that happened
that you
process the pain around on a very deep
somatic level
that you accepted you can't change that
you moved through the grief that comes
along with not being able to change a
traumatic past event
that you let go of the way you wish
things had gone
that you accepted
what happened instead that you accepted
not just the trauma that happened but
the impact that it had on your life and
maybe the ways in which it continued to
traumatize you in small ways as your
life went on because maybe you developed
ptsd and that impacted your ability to
function the way you wanted to for the
next 10 years and those 10 years and the
way that you wished you'd been able to
function during that time might be an
entire time period you need to grieve
right
but it's only once we have both felt the
full weight of what's happened
accepted it integrated it grieved it
which let me tell you is a process and
then
also felt as though we understood the
sequence of events that led to it
happening
well enough that we now feel reasonably
sure we can protect ourselves from that
thing happening again in the future or
that we're at least giving ourselves a
pretty good chance at that not happening
again in the future that's when trauma
is resolved when our nervous system is
responding appropriately to things as
they're actually happening right the
learning is complete when you have
properly contextualized the sequence of
events and also integrated the emotional
impact of it
that's how we heal from trauma and that
is so
much easier said than done of course and
we will have many more videos on this
and i am going to get a lot more into i
think what it looks like to heal from
attachment trauma attachment wounds
attachment injuries
um that's what i'm qualified to speak to
i can't speak to
trauma at large from a
clinician's standpoint because i'm not a
general clinician
uh but i can speak quite a bit to
attachment trauma attachment woundings
attachment injury
and a lot of that absolutely meets the
criteria for trauma
so
more to come on this but i just wanted
to kind of share that definition that i
find really helpful for understanding
what it means to have trauma as well as
what it means to resolve trauma is that
trauma is incomplete learning it is when
we don't have all the information we
need to make predictions about the
likelihood of that same thing happening
again in the future and the learning is
complete when everything is understood
and integrated and we feel more capable
of moving into the future in a way that
is responding to what's actually
happening rather than getting triggered
back into these old responses at any
slight indication that that thing might
be happening or
completely omitting the information that
we should have learned and walking right
back into dangerous situations because
we deny the impact that they've had on
us
okay
that's all i've got for today on this
topic
um it's so nice to be back with you guys
i took a little break from youtube but i
am super super happy to be here
posting again let me know in the
comments any questions you have any
comments any thoughts any reflections
that you're having on anything we talked
about today and as always i love you
guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again super soon
[Music]