hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we talk
about our relationship with ourselves
our relationship with other people and
lately we've been talking a lot about
how to build Intimacy in this video I
want to go over something that is maybe
one of my most requested topics which is
how do you know that the time is right
to be vulnerable with someone so I have
people kind of asking this question from
various ends of the attachment Spectrum
so those coming from the more avoidant
side of the attachment Spectrum might be
learning vulnerability and intimate
self-sharing as kind of a new skill in
their relationships whereas those who
come from the anxious side of the
spectrum might actually need to do the
work on figuring out how to discern who
it's safe to be vulnerable with so you
may be a little bit prone to over
disclosing and over trusting people with
your vulnerabilities if you have
historically aired more anxious so so in
this video we're going to talk about how
to know when it is the appropriate time
and with whom it is appropriate to be
vulnerable with now there is no perfect
science to this you can never guarantee
that an instance of sharing something
vulnerable with another person is going
to end well or go in your favor so what
this video is going to talk about is how
to make sure that you are at the least
making a reasonably safe bet when it
comes to opening up and becoming more
vulnerable with someone we're going to
talk not just about how to identify the
signs of a safe other but also how to
identify green flags inside of yourself
that you are at a point where you are
emotionally capable of opening yourself
up to another person with respect to the
fact that it might not go the way you
want it to sometimes being vulnerable
feels bad doesn't go the way that we
would hope actually creates rupture
teachers in our relationship that we
can't find a way to repair and so
figuring out who it might be reasonably
safe for you to practice vulnerable
self-sharing with is going to be really
instrumental in making sure that you are
not senselessly harming Yourself by
being vulnerable in instances where it
doesn't really help you or the other
person to do that so without further Ado
we're going to get into some of the
signs or some of the green flags that
it's a good time for you to start being
vulnerable with another person so green
flag number one in the other is that you
have seen this person display a pattern
of taking their own and other people's
emotions seriously so if we are looking
specifically at emotional vulnerability
what we want to be looking at in the
other person is do they have a pattern
of taking emotions seriously as opposed
to kind of having a pattern of scoffing
at dismissing or even expressing
contempt towards their their own or
other people's more vulnerable emotions
and this is often a trait that you can
observe just in everyday conversations
or interactions so I remember one time
being in a conversation with two kind of
new friends and one of them was telling
this story about how he was seeing this
girl and she was so obsessed with him he
liked her but she wanted to get married
and have kids and he was so not into
that and the other friend looked at him
and went well are you going to talk to
her about that that seems like a pretty
important factor in whether or not you
guys are going to continue in a
relationship so I'm surprised you
haven't brought it up to her yet and the
Stark difference in the emotional
maturity there became instantly clear
right if I were looking for someone to
be vulnerable with and to share my
feelings with knowing that those
feelings would be relatively safe and
taken seriously by the other person
which of those two people would it make
more sense to put my trust in the one
who has this kind of air of superiority
and contempt around other people having
feelings or the one who has a more
balanced perspective so little moments
like these are the ones you want to
watch out for when you're figuring out
who it's safe to be vulnerable around so
green flag is that they don't think
other people are weird or weak for
having feelings and that you've observed
a pattern of them treating other
people's feelings seriously and with
respect sign number two and this one
pertains to the self it's a green flag
that you're likely ready to be
vulnerable with someone if you have a
clear reason for why you want to be
vulnerable with that person and that
reason is appropriate within the context
of your current relationship so there
are many good reasons to be a little bit
more vulnerable in relationship an
example might be you are getting to know
someone and you want to test out what if
I get a little bit more personal a
little bit more real with them how are
they going to respond because that's
going to give you information about
whether or not you're able to get closer
with that person being close often means
doing a little bit of that vulnerable
self-sharing that is inherent to
co-regulation chin a lot of the time but
you have to make sure that you are doing
this in a way that is appropriate to the
context of your current relationship so
if you are on a second date with someone
it might not be appropriate at that
point in your relationship to let them
know everything about your childhood
trauma we have to look at why we are
sharing what we're sharing and whether
or not it is the appropriate time and
place to share that much am I sharing
that much because I think it actually
makes sense for them to know that much
about me on a second date or am I
sharing all of this because in this
moment I feel dysregulated I'm unable to
regulate myself around whatever memory
has just come up or whatever feeling I'm
experiencing so I'm putting it all on
the table and hoping that they can help
return me to equilibrium the big things
the things that are very raw and intense
for most people don't come up until the
relationship is already fairly
established that doesn't mean you can't
reference difficult things you've been
through however if if you're looking to
do really big intense co-regulating with
the person you don't know that well it's
highly likely that you might need to do
some work on adjusting your own
boundaries to make sure that you're not
practicing Reckless vulnerability
Reckless vulnerability is when we are
not establishing boundaries around who
it is and is not safe for us to be
vulnerable with we are simply handing
over all of our psychological stuff to
anyone who we think will listen because
we don't know how to self-regulate
around it ourselves and if you struggle
to figure out where the limits are in
this capacity try asking friends loved
ones maybe a therapist if you're able to
talk to One what they think is
appropriate in terms of how much to
share when in a relationship but the
important part here is that if you are
able to zoom out and put in proper
context why you're sharing what you're
sharing when you're sharing it you're
also going to be able to properly
contextualize whatever response you get
so if you are sharing something with
someone because you're trying to get to
know them better and you test it out and
you find that they're kind of closed off
or that they have a reaction that
doesn't make you feel very good in
response to what you shared now you have
information right you learn okay if this
person isn't particularly open into deep
sharing or to talking about things that
feel a little bit more emotional or a
little bit more vulnerable maybe that
means I need to take a step back until
it feels like they're ready to go there
with me green flag number three that
somebody is a good person to be
vulnerable with is that they have been
receptive and attentive to small things
that you've been vulnerable about in the
past or to small conflicts that you've
had in the past so the idea here again
is that you want to increase the
vulnerability levels in a relationship
in intervals so you don't go from zero
to a hundred right you don't start nice
to meet you and on date two go to here's
the worst thing that's ever happened to
me and all of the feelings I've never
found a way to process around it you
want to go from nice to meet you to what
are you interested in to how do you feel
about X Y and Z two what's going on for
you lately to what is the greater
context of your life and your childhood
and your experiences and how are they
all converging in this moment and that
progression and takes time as it should
because trust has to get built in tiny
intervals along the way
right can I trust you to keep the small
agreements that we make to each other
yes or no can I trust you if a conflict
comes up between us to handle it
respectfully yes or no can I trust you
to be consistent and to keep confidence
in the areas that you claim you would
keep confidence we take Tiny Steps in
the direction of increased trust and
increased vulnerability if we are
approaching things from a secure place
and if you are getting respectful
responses at every little step along the
way or when disrespect happens if you're
able to address it and come to a
conclusion that actually changes the way
the two of you relate in the future for
the better all of those are green signs
that you can get a little bit more
vulnerable with that person
vulnerability green flag number four the
vulnerability balance in your
relationship with this person is
approximately equal so they're sharing
with you and disclosing things about
themselves to you in approximately equal
measure as you're sharing with them and
disclosing things about yourself to them
this is what a secure relationship looks
like both people are comfortable with
the fact that both they have feelings
needs desires and vulnerabilities and
that the other person does as well there
isn't this Dynamic where one person is
constantly being vulnerable and pouring
their heart out and the other person is
constantly receiving it but not being
vulnerable in return that's more of
either a limerent or a caretaking
dynamic right both people are not seeing
each other as equals in that case so
this is just another one to watch out
for when I am honest and open with this
person are they being honest and open
about their feelings with me in return
if yes that's a pretty good sign if not
it might be a sign that I want to take a
step back because an unequal
relationship for whatever reason is
starting to develop here and it's not
the most self-protective thing to do to
continue to make yourself vulnerable
towards someone who you know almost
nothing about and return and that's a
really important one that those who err
on the side of overdoing vulnerability
tend to naturally Miss so just know if
your inclination is to not watch out for
this one and start logging it in your
own mind green flag number five that
it's a good time to be vulnerable with
someone is that you have a pretty clear
awareness of the impact your
vulnerability might have on them
so you are not looking at them as kind
of a savior or a parent figure who is
going to be there to endlessly take your
vulnerability and help you transform it
into a better feeling you're aware that
they are also their own individual with
a complex set of needs and feelings and
experiences and there's a possibility
that your share is going to trigger
something in them or that they're not
actually going to be capable of
responding to you in the way that you
would like and so going into the sharing
period you're aware of the fact that
something like that could happen so this
might be as simple as just checking in
on what's going on for this person right
now what does their week look like this
week are there things that are on their
plate that are causing them stress is it
likely that they have the emotional
capacity right now to take on something
that feels kind of heavy for me and the
more we know people and the closer we
are to them the more we're going to have
a natural sense of this the less we know
people and the less of a natural
awareness we have of all of that the
more we're going to have to be explicit
and ask them about those things so this
can be as simple as reaching out and
going hey there's something in
particular that I'd really like to talk
to you about can you tell me when might
be a good time for you if you're open to
that and then being receptive to
whatever they tell you in response to
make sure that you are staying
respectful of their experience green
flag number six that it might be a good
time to practice vulnerability with
someone is that in the past they have
been firm but kind about asserting their
boundaries so what you don't want to
assume here is that if somebody has
never asserted a boundary to you or
never made it clear what isn't isn't
okay with them that anything goes that's
actually venturing into pretty dangerous
territory what you want to look out for
is does someone make it explicit and
clear when they have reached an
emotional limit when they need time and
space to themselves they are feeling
overwhelmed or upset or hurt do they
have a pattern of communicating those
things and are you clear on where their
boundaries lie
the reason why this is important is
because if you are being vulnerable with
someone who is not good at knowing where
their own boundaries are and who has a
tendency to caretake or to go past their
limits when they see someone else in
Need You may be setting yourself up for
either a codependent response where they
try to take on too much in response to
your vulnerability or where they pull
back without a lot of explanation
because they're not able to consciously
recognize the point where they became
overwhelmed and needed to disconnect so
again a green flag here is that this
person has a history of being clear yet
kind about where their boundaries lie so
when you're going to them with something
more raw something more vulnerable you
can trust that they are going to behave
in a self-protective way and that they
are going to respect their own
boundaries in relation to your problem
rather than becoming enmeshed with it
which again is the birthplace of
codependency green flag number seven is
the direct inverse of this you know
where your limits and boundaries lie and
you feel as though you are capable of
recognizing them when you hit a limit or
a boundary in real time and taking care
of yourself around that limiter boundary
in order to be vulnerable in a secure
non-reckless way we have to be able to
recognize what's happening when we start
to feel overwhelmed disrespected or
triggered in real time and we have to
know how to take care of ourselves in
those moments otherwise what happens is
the thing that we are sharing we become
desperate for the other person to have a
specific response to and as soon as we
are desperate for someone to have a
specific response to our vulnerability
we are at high risk of starting to
subtly tweak or exaggerate our story in
order to get the response we want out of
them and then we are no longer behaving
vulnerably we are unconsciously behaving
in a manipulative way in order to get
the soothing that we need because we
can't give that soothing to ourselves
to practice safe and secure
vulnerability means having an awareness
of where our own limits and boundaries
are and knowing how to pull back and
protect and soothe ourselves if we hit
that limit this part is very important
because this is the thing that allows us
to share vulnerably without becoming
codependent or enmeshed in the process
if you want to throw out absolutely
everything from this video except one
point please keep this one knowing your
boundaries and limits being able to
recognize them in real time and knowing
when it is the appropriate point to take
a step back and self-soothe is vital for
practicing secure and healthy
vulnerability green flag number eight is
a simple one but a lot of us are quick
to forget it it is a green flag to have
a tender vulnerable interconnected
feeling with someone if they explicitly
tell you now is a good time for me and
that consent seems relatively
enthusiastic so they genuinely seem to
be open to hearing what you have to say
and overall you're both on the same page
about the fact that you're going to have
one of those conversations I'm not
saying this needs to happen every single
time particularly if you are in a longer
term relationship with this person where
you've already built a high degree of
trust and interpersonal Attunement
however in the early stages it just does
not hurt to ask if you initially are not
sure green flag number nine that it
might be a good time to practice
vulnerability with someone is that you
know how to take care of yourself if you
don't get the response that you want
from your sharing this one once again is
incredibly important if you go into a
very vulnerable very high stakes
conversation with nothing in place to
help you deal with the potential Fallout
if it doesn't go the way you want it to
go you are behaving very recklessly and
your inner child is going to be the one
who pays the price of that in any
relationship no matter how secure it is
things will one hundred percent without
a shadow of a doubt go wrong at some
point some conflict will come up there
will be a period whether it is a matter
of hours or a matter of days where you
need healthy space from that person in
order to return to your individual
selves before coming back together and
figuring things out and in that time you
are going to need other support systems
other people you can talk to other
activities you can turn to other ways
you can soothe and regulate yourself
that does not involve this other person
it is a green flag if you know even if
this does not turn out the way I want it
to I have a plan in place for what I
will do to keep myself okay right that
is being a secure protective parent for
our inner children and last but not
least released the 10th green flag that
it is a good time for you to practice
vulnerability with another human being
is that you're comfortable with the
thought of trading off and being a
secure base for that person in the
future
so again insecure Dynamics both people
take turns being the slightly more
regulated person while the other is
feeling a little bit more vulnerable and
that balance is approximately equal
there will of course be periods where
one person needs a little bit more
support than the other but overall the
balance should not be significantly
skewed in One Direction so really ask
yourself before disclosing over and over
again something vulnerable to another
person am I comfortable with them being
just as vulnerable with me as opposed to
a situation where it kind of turns you
off a little bit or you feel a little
bit disgusted at the thought of them
turning to you for care support and
advice when they're feeling vulnerable
if that's the case it's likely you're
not looking for a relationship of equals
to have a secure Dynamic with you're
looking for more of a parent figure
right if you are consistently finding
yourself attract attracted to people who
seem very invulnerable themselves and
whom if you're really honest with
yourself you kind of like don't have a
lot of problems that they share with you
and again you can have any type of
relationship you want you're just not
necessarily setting yourself up for the
safest most emotionally secure situation
if that's the one you're walking into so
big green flag is that you know without
a shadow of a doubt that this is in
equal parts relationship you can share
with them because in approximately equal
part they can and are wanting to share
with you as well
all right that's all I have to say for
today on the topic of green flags when
it comes to vulnerability as always let
me know in the comments what your
thoughts feelings perspectives are I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again super soon
[Music]