hey guys Heidi prep here welcome back to
my Channel today I have an opinion to
share that I feel like is going to make
me sound like a bit of a grandfather
like I am your crotchety old grandpa Joe
who's like the kids don't have any sense
of what matters anymore get off my lawn
and I am fine with that especially as
someone who does not have any living
grandparents and now tasks themselves
with coming up with grandfatherly advice
and I want to talk about a concept that
I think has been kind of lost in the
Modern Age and that concept is the
concept of self-esteem so I was
rereading one of my favorite books the
other day it's called the six pillars of
self-esteem by a man named Nathaniel
Brandon and this book came out a long
time ago I think it came out in like 70s
or maybe it was the 90s I could totally
be making that up but anyways I read it
when I was in high school I think I was
16 or 17 when I first picked up this
book and so many things about the way
that he defines self-esteem really just
clicked into place for me like I was
like yes I can work with this and what I
liked in particular about this book is
that he divided self-esteem into two
categories one being self-efficacy so
our ability to think of ourselves as
competent and able to get what we want
out of the world our ability to take
care of ourselves to go for our goals
and reach them and then self-respect
which means thinking of ourselves as
people who are worthy of having good
lives of going for our goals of having
close connected relationships of being
seen by other people and being loved
both by ourselves and others and I think
looking back on this now what he
accidentally did was represented secure
attachment so essentially when we look
at the avoidance side of the attachment
Spectrum we're looking at how we
cognitively process information and
figure out via sequence of events how to
get what we want in life so the
avoidance side of the attachment
Spectrum represents competence and
self-reliance but it fails to integrate
emotional well-being and then the
anxious side of the attachment Spectrum
looks at what happens when we integrate
emotion and we get in tune with what our
wants and feelings and desires are but
we fail to integrate cognition and see
ourselves as autonomous and independent
agents now secure attachment is when we
are both aware of our emotions we know
ourselves deeply and we think of
ourselves as worthy lovable human beings
who are also capable of giving deep love
to others and we have a strong belief in
our own competence and like we're able
to get whatever it is that our emotions
tell us we want out of life so returning
to this definition of self-esteem like a
whole double my life later actually made
it make even more sense to me and I
loved that and I wanted to sit down
today and share some of the things that
I think we have kind of lost when it
comes to how we look at self-esteem in
the modern age that we need to
reintegrate into the picture I think
that for many years we looked only at
that self-efficacy side of things right
like the baby boomer generation was all
about like pulling yourself up from your
bootstraps making something of yourself
working hard to get what you want in
life and those are all great things and
then in the current age I think we have
swung the pendulum over to the other
side and now we're looking a lot more at
that emotional side of things how do we
make ourselves vulnerable how do we
create lasting deep connections and so
most of us are going to struggle more
with one side of this than the other
maybe depending on which attachment
style we Veer towards but I think the
modern age has made it easier than ever
to dissociate from both sides of this
spectrum so it's very easy in this day
and age to encounter any sort of
challenge adversity difficulty and go I
am going to dissociate from this and go
on my phone and hope it works itself out
it is very easy to encounter emotional
difficulties and not sit down with
people and work things out face to face
but instead to go online and tweet about
how they're a narcissist it is easier
than it has ever been at any point in
history with the technology we have
today to not develop self-esteem and
today I want to talk about how we can
circumnavigate these cultural norms that
we've created around dissociating from
all of our problems and learn to
actually focus in on them for long
enough to build true deep holistic
embodied self-esteem and if you are able
to do this this puts you in like the one
percent of people who are taking that
Road Less Traveled but not doing so
leaves us feeling weak vulnerable
unfulfilled Hollow depressed anxious
right all of these things are now
rampant in our culture could be avoided
if we were to really show up for
ourselves so without any further
ceremony I'm going to get into 10 things
that I think are super important for
building Rock Solid unshakable
self-esteem when I say rock solid and
unshakable I don't mean nothing bad is
ever going to happen to you I mean
building up a sense of self that is big
enough to absorb difficult things
happening and come out the other side
both stronger and more compassionate for
those things so ingredient number one
for developing strong self-esteem find a
way to love and feel good in your own
skin now there has been this kind of
movement in the past five to ten years
where we are very body positive and
that's a wonderful thing I don't think
anybody gets anywhere by endlessly
trying to conform to BS beauty standards
and then shaming themselves when they
don't look perfect but I think that what
has been lost in this movement is the
importance of feeling like you like the
way that you feel in your body right
when we look in the mirror and hate what
we see when we feed our bodies garbage
when we don't get enough exercise or
deep rest we feel like trash and when we
feel like trash we present ourselves
like trash and when we present ourselves
like trash we are signaling to the world
I don't respect myself and you shouldn't
either again this does not mean you need
to be dressed to the nines every day all
it means is that you have found a way to
love the skin that you're in and to feel
confident in it and to share yourself
with other people in a way that signals
to them hey I respect myself right when
we treat our bodies respectfully when we
feed them healthy foods when we give
them the amounts of exercise they need
when we get deep restful sleep we are
sending a direct message to our inner
children that they are worthy of being
taken care of child who is only fed
garbage who is never encouraged to get
any exercise who doesn't get the right
amount of sleep is a child who becomes
lethargic depressed and lacking in
self-esteem and it's negligent as
apparent to not take care of your
children's health it is also negligent
as an adult to not take care of your own
health to send the message to your own
inner child that you don't matter enough
to be taken care of and I think that for
a lot of people this isn't as simple as
we think it is right I think think that
for a lot of us our body image issues or
the way that we treat our bodies are
very tied into trauma are very tied into
maybe deep beliefs that we have that we
don't deserve a healthy thriving body
that we feel happy in and proud of maybe
it feels scary or intimidating to put
effort into the way that you present
yourself knowing that that means other
people are going to start taking you
more seriously and I want to reiterate
I'm the last person who is ever going to
advocate for restricting denying hating
yourself into a place where you fit
conventional beauty standards but I am
the first person to advocate for finding
a way to love feeling healthy and
energetic in your own body and finding a
way to love what you see when you look
in the mirror there's this line that I
think is in the song stolen by Dashboard
Confessional showing my angst into my
age a little bit but it goes we all look
like we feel and I have found that to be
very true we are always communicating
either I respect myself or I do not
respect myself to other people and
irregardless of what you you look like
on the outside people who respect
themselves and radiate that energy are
attractive as hell and feeling
attractive as hell does not hurt the
self-esteem step two for developing a
stronger more robust sense of
self-esteem learn to face your
challenges head on instead of avoiding
them instead of going online and finding
ten thousand victim labels you can put
on yourself and ten thousand perpetrator
labels you can put on the people in your
lives actually sit down with the people
you are having conflict with and see if
you can work through your conflicts
instead of stressing out and freaking
out when you need help with something
and you don't know how to Barrel on
through with it on your own actually
reach out and ask for help instead of
opening five thousand tabs and deciding
that the task you wanted to do is not
worth being vulnerable at all to
complete if you are in pain if you are
suffering if you are struggling in any
way that is overwhelmingly consuming
your attention find solutions to that
problem do not turn to your phone to to
the internet to any of the Myriad
available distractions to soothe the
pain without solving the problem and I
honestly think this is the thing that is
causing the crisis in self-esteem that
we have in our generation is the ability
to dissociate from our suffering instead
of moving through it feeling our pain
and getting to the other side and it's
kind of like we are always taking Advil
when we have a broken leg the point of
pain if you have a broken leg is to
motivate you to go to the hospital and
get your leg fixed and the same is true
of Psychic Spiritual emotional pain when
we are in pain the point is not to find
something that numbs out the pain the
point is to sit with the pain long
enough to understand what is not working
in our lives and then to fix it and if
we don't do this just like if we don't
take ourselves to the hospital when we
have a broken leg we weaken ourselves
over time right our emotional system
stops working the same way our physical
system stops working if we don't tend to
our physical pain learn to sit with
learn from and integrate pain and you
will make yourself infinitely stronger
both emotionally and practically because
avoiding all your pain takes a lot of
time and a lot of resource up trust me
step three for developing Rock Solid
self-esteem pick goals that feel
intrinsically meaningful to you and then
set those goals and complete them and I
want to be very clear here that's
similar to number one which is not about
hating yourself into conventional beauty
standards this is not about pushing
yourself towards BS societal standards
so if you don't care that much about
getting rich and famous do not make your
goal getting rich and famous you will
absolutely murder your soul in the
process of doing that when I'm talking
about intrinsic goals I'm talking about
things that feel inherently meaningful
to you so this can be something like oh
I want to have a community so I'm going
to commit to showing up to different
events and sharing myself authentically
with people then collecting people that
I've feel really aligned with and
fostering relationships with those
people it can be I want to feel happy
and confident in my own skin so I'm
going to find a form of physical
activity that I love and I'm going to
get better and better and better at that
thing it can be I want to learn an
instrument I want to learn to film
YouTube videos I want to become a writer
something that you feel like is a true
authentic expression of your soul if you
pick that you commit to honing that
skill and then you hone it you will
build incredible self trust okay
self-trust comes from recognizing what's
important to you and doing what you said
you would do for yourself and both parts
are equally important right let's say
you had a friend who always showed up to
the events that you plan together but
they didn't really care if the events
were something that you actually wanted
to go to you wouldn't really like or
feel very close to that friend right now
imagine if you had a friend who always
got you excited hyped up about things
they wanted to do with you that you
thought were really exciting but then
they always bailed or refused to show up
for those events in both cases you would
not really like respect or feel close or
a sense of trust with that friend so
don't be that friend to yourself right
don't only set goals that you know
you're gonna hate and not feel aligned
with and then when you do set a goal
that you actually feel aligned with show
up to it make it a priority be willing
to give yourself permission to
prioritize what your soul wants not just
what your cognitive self wants and this
can be something you only do for 10
minutes a day if that's all the time
that you have in a day but you will
begin to build self-trust through the
process of doing this and self-trust is
the absolute Foundation of self-esteem
we cannot build anything without
self-trust so give yourself that gift
tool number four for building Rock Solid
self-esteem I feel like such a like Guru
saying that sentence it just feels so
cheesy and I also kind of love it so I'm
going to keep saying it
um but anyways number four when you mess
up or when you are unhappy in Life or
when you've made a mistake or when you
are struggling take the time to
understand yourself deeply without
judgment so imagine that you have like a
four-year-old child and this child has
messed up and they don't know why they
messed up as a loving parent you would
not just yell and berate this kid you
would sit with them and you would help
them understand what led to their
behavior if you are a halfway decent
parent right you would not leave them
alone in their distress and Bully them
and not give them an actual route
forward to help them change this
behavior that is obviously distressing
to them and to you you would sit with
them until you understood what the
problem was without judgment and then
you would help them find a better
solution going forward and this is also
what we have to be willing to do for
ourselves if we want to have that
self-trust so when we mess up instead of
going you're an idiot you should have
known better we need to sit with
ourselves and go why did this happen
What deeper need was maybe going
unfulfilled that I didn't recognize that
suddenly came out screaming in this
situation and ended up creating a
problem for me in another area if we can
get at what that deeper need is or was
then we can find a way to meet it and
fulfill it without sabotaging some other
area of our lives in the process there's
this quote that I couldn't find again I
hate when that happens but it happens
like once a video lately that goes love
is at the root of understanding
understanding is at the root of love and
this kind of encapsulates my entire
philosophy on what love is it is about
sitting and being willing to get on the
same page with someone to understand
them holistically enough that your
judgments of them disappear because you
understand the whole and entire context
of why they are doing what they're doing
doing and that doesn't mean that you
don't help them find better routes
forward if you see a better route
forward it doesn't mean that you
automatically say yes everything you're
doing including the things you do that
hurt other people is okay it just means
that you take the time to really
understand what was motivating them and
why they behave the way they do and this
is the kind of love we need to show
ourselves if we want to have our lives
work it's not even a matter of like the
soft kind of fluffy like oh forgive
yourself stuff it's literally just if we
don't develop an awareness of all of the
moving pieces of our own psyche all of
our own wants and underlying needs we
are not going to be able to find
solutions to our problems that are going
to work because the things that we are
neglecting in our psyche are going to
come out screaming and we are going to
experience those things as self-sabotage
so this step is both emotionally
important and practically important
right beating ourselves up shaming
ourselves telling ourselves we're idiots
is not just on kind it's literally
impractical it is cutting ourselves off
from important information that if we
integrated it could allow Our Lives to
run much more smoothly so step four is
about figuring out and being really
honest with ourselves about what our
needs and wants are which ways they come
up that we might not expect them to come
up in and when that happens being
committed to understanding not shaming
understanding is at the root of
self-love self-love is at the root of
self-understanding step five for
developing Rock Solid self-esteem this
might be the most important one stop
waiting for anybody else for any reason
in any situation to come save you from
your circumstances so in Nathaniel
Brendan's book six pillars of
self-esteem he has a subheading if not a
whole chapter that's just titled no one
is coming to save you and when I read
that when I was 16 years old I put it on
a whiteboard and I hung it in my room
for a year and for a year every time I
had a problem every time I was
struggling with a relationship or a job
or a situation I asked myself what would
I do if I knew without a shadow of a
doubt that absolutely nothing about this
situation was ever going to change for
the better unless I made the change
myself and asking ourselves this
question gets at the root of
self-responsibility right it is a
wonderful thing to have Community to
have other people to be helped and
supported as we move towards our goals
however any time we are Outsourcing any
part of our well-being our happiness
anytime we are telling ourselves I will
feel complete and happy when we are
setting ourselves up for nothing but
resentment and disappointment and anger
at the world if we can ask ourselves
what would I do if I knew without a
shadow of a doubt that the situation I'm
in would not change unless I took
complete and total control of it how
differently would you be living your
life and if the answer is very
differently then this might be a really
important step to focus on right what if
you were never going to meet the love of
your life life unless you went out and
found them what if you were never going
to be working your dream job unless you
created the company that would give you
that job right this radical
self-responsibility is not always going
to be what we default to in life but
especially when we are in conditions
where we are feeling disempowered where
we are feeling angry and resentful at
the world these are all often internal
cues that we are waiting to be rescued
from our situation if you can become the
person who shows up and saves you from
your own circumstances the way you have
been waiting for someone or something
else to do think of how much you would
love yourself right think of how much
respect and awe and admiration you would
have for yourself and what's the other
word for those things that's right
self-esteem step six for developing Rock
Solid self-esteem which I now can't say
without laughing
um start telling the truth as often as
humanly possible to yourself and other
people so I think it's a Brittany Brown
quote shame cannot survive being seen
when we have have things inside of
ourselves that we believe are so
shameful so unshareable so toxic and
terrible and bad that if anyone else
were to see them they would instantly
reject us it is crippling for our
self-esteem because we will do anything
we will go to any lengths to avoid being
seen including being wildly inauthentic
Walling ourselves off from True
connections and failing to go for the
things we actually want in life the more
we can tell the truth to ourselves and
the more we can open ourselves up to
vulnerable authentic honest sharing with
other people the more we are going to
learn that there is not that much in us
that is that different from other people
I think most of the things that most of
us feel unrelenting shame over are
actually a lot more common than we think
maybe not the specific situations that
led to those feelings but the feelings
themselves are often much more Universal
than we imagined them to be
but very few people are brave enough to
actually live in alignment with the
person they are living in alignment just
means being the same person inside and
outside it means telling people what
you're actually thinking what you're
actually feeling what's actually going
on for you and this means owning our
weaknesses but it also means owning our
strengths which is a lot harder for a
lot of people a lot of us feel almost
safer in a state of disempowerment of
pretending that we are not capable or
competent enough to get what we want out
of life it keeps us away from trying and
failing right but when we start telling
the truth all the time it forces us to
take responsibility not just for what we
don't like about ourselves but for what
we do like and what we do want out of
ourselves in the world and other people
very few people live that way but the
people who do build immense self-respect
right because again look at that
definition of self-respect believing
that you are worthy of having the things
you want in life and if you can't be
honest with yourself or other people
about what those things are it's going
to be hard to maintain that sense of
self-respect to absolutely bolster it
start getting really freaking honest
step number seven Focus way less on what
you want to take from the world and
weigh more on what you want to give back
to it so I remember reading this study
years and years ago about the value of
community I am all about the value of
community if you know me but at all you
know this about me and I remember
reading that what people find most
valuable when it comes to communities is
not what they get from the communities
but what they contribute to them so
people who feel like they are able to
contribute to the world and to their
communities in meaningful ways tend to
experience much greater well-being than
people who feel like they don't have
that much to offer which kind of
reminded me of another study I read one
time that was talking about how there's
a certain age at which babies if you
take a piece of string and like tied
around their ankle and then tie the
other end of the string to a mobile
above their head at a certain age the
baby will learn when I kick my leg the
mobile moves and this is super exciting
to babies because it is the beginning of
them experiencing a sense of autonomy of
realizing what I do creates change even
if it's just a small change like the
mobile moving and I think that as adults
when we get really depressed when we get
down on ourselves when our self-esteem
suffers it's often because we have
forgotten that we can make change in the
world there's a period of my own life
not too long ago where I was going
through a really deep depressive episode
and I was talking to my mom on the phone
one day and she went well Heidi you are
someone who has so much to offer the
world and I think that you are not
spending enough time giving back like I
think that what you might need is to
take the focus off of yourself off of
your own emotional well-being for a
while and just remind yourself that you
can give things to people and I kid you
not that was the single best piece of
advice that I have heard in ages and I
did decide in that in instance to
completely stop focusing on what traumas
I needed to work through what
relationships I wanted repair within
what kind of puzzles in my own psyche I
was desperately trying to solve and I
was like for a while I'm literally just
going to give back as much as I humanly
can to other people to my friends to my
community to the world and that ended up
being the thing that allowed me to climb
out of the depressive hole that I had
gotten myself stuck in was remembering I
have things to give the world even when
I don't like being here even when I
don't like being in my own skin and my
own brain and my own world I can still
kick my leg and watch that mobile move
in a positive direction I still have the
ability to influence the world and I
think it's actually a psychologically
dangerous thing to forget this because
when we forget that we have things we
could give back it becomes very easy to
just get fixated on what we want to get
and the more we are fixated on what we
want to get the more we are in a
disempowered victim state which leads to
low self-esteem and the Brilliance of
focusing more on what we can give than
what we can get is that we become like
this ball of energy and light that draws
things into us there's a Casanova quote
be the flame not the moth when we are
living in a disempowered way when we
have forgotten or neglected our autonomy
and we have failed to focus on what we
can offer other people we are like moths
just trying to constantly find something
that's going to give us a little bit of
warmth go out trying to find people or
situations that make us feel whole and
complete and it never really works right
and often we fly right into those flames
and get burned but when we can become
that center of gravity that flame that
burns brightly enough that other people
start getting drawn into us it's a much
more stable grounding fulfilling
self-esteem inducing scenario to put
ourselves in right be the flame not the
moth not in a I'm gonna go
manipulatively do a whole bunch of
favors for other people that they didn't
ask for so that they will then pay
attention to me but truly giving as an
end in and of itself reminds us that we
have a place in this world when we have
forgotten it step eight this is my
favorite one that I've developed
recently keep yourself humble by
reminding yourself regularly that you
are going to die I think that we have
gotten too disconnected from Death in
our Tech obsessed culture we have Myriad
ways to dissociate from the fact that we
are going to die someday and this used
to not be the case right when we didn't
live in cities when we did not have
technology everywhere when we lived in
communities that valued the elderly and
surrounded ourselves with people who are
at all stages of life we were always a
little bit aware of the fact that we
were mortal and that we were going to
not be here someday and that the time we
have here matters and that we owe it to
ourselves to spend it in meaningful ways
we have a culture that is so completely
avoidant of and distracted from the fact
fact that we're going to die that we get
obsessed with these Petty meaningless
concerns because we lose perspective on
our lives there's a book called the
denial of death by Ernest Becker that
talks all about this he just goes into
how everything about the way we have set
up the world is about shielding
ourselves from this idea that we are
going to die and this is in some ways
psychologically adaptive right we can't
be overwhelmed by let's say fear of
death but if anything I think that the
more afraid we are of death the more
anxious we are about dying it's because
we have not actually accepted that
that's going to happen to us there's a
reason why people who have near-death
experiences tend to come back reporting
like a new lease on life right because
those moments Force us to focus in and
hone very specifically and on what
matters to us in life and if we can find
ways to remind ourselves of our own
mortality we are going to live in a
Perpetual state of reminding ourselves
what matters so I like to do a death
meditation every day where I literally
sit down and imagine that I'm about to
die but other ways that I think we could
do this are just spending more time in
nature or in other situations where we
feel small and vulnerable and connected
to our own mortality right we live in a
very physically and psychologically
cushioned World in many ways where it's
easy to lose perspective on what matters
to us but if we want to have Rock Solid
self-esteem part of what that is is
being able to identify what our True
Values are in life and then being able
to use that self-efficacy piece to go
pursue them but this requires us to be
really connected with ourselves and
really connected to what matters to us
which we have to be a little bit in
touch with our own mortality in order to
do step number nine for developing Rock
Solid self-esteem throw out the good
enough yardstick so stop comparing
yourself to other people on BS measures
that you know are BS you know this
because you do your death meditation
every morning and you recognize what
matters to you in life and just refuse
to play stupid games with your life you
play stupid games you win stupid prizes
and I think that for them most part like
90 plus percent of people in our given
age are playing stupid games winning
stupid prizes and then trying
desperately to figure out why they are
depressed anxious messes this is the
society that we live in promotes stupid
games the stupid games are built around
people who make money off convincing
people of their insecurities and then
selling them a solution you cannot sell
people a real solution to their
insecurities insecurities can only get
solved through developing self-respect
and self-efficacy which is what we're
trying to do here so there is a quote I
love the best things in life are free
the second best things are very
expensive the person who is out there
winning the materialism game who has
achieved unfettered success money
attractiveness all of these things that
we try to sell to people will not ever
ever be as happy as the person who is
not playing that game in the first place
and who knows that a good life is about
having meaningful deep connections about
being in touch with yourself about
figuring out what excites you what makes
you feel alive and energized and
inspired and about centering your life
around those things that person is
self-actualizing from the inside out
right the person who's trying to
self-actualize from the outside in is
playing a rigged game with stupid prizes
when we learn to say no to what does not
matter to us and yes to what does matter
to us we start Not only living more in
alignment with what we want out of life
but we also draw people in who want
those same things and then we get real
connections and we get real excitement
and we get real Joy when we wake up in
the mornings and that is something that
no amount of that good enough game will
ever bring us ever in a million years
best things are free second best things
are very expensive and last but not
least step 10 for developing Rock Solid
self-esteem focus on what you can
control not on what you can't control
and I think that once again this is one
that's gotten difficult for us in the
society that we live in because we now
have access to more information than we
have ever had access to at any point in
human history and it's very easy to
become obsessed with and overwhelmed by
very large scale problems that we don't
feel like we have any autonomy over
fixing and I think that focusing our
Awareness on those large of issues is a
fast track to depression and I know that
as someone who has spent much of my life
doing that now does this mean we should
dissociate from the larger scale
problems the world is facing absolutely
not does it mean that we should focus
our attention and our sense of autonomy
on what we can control yes so if I love
to unpack all of these giant problems
with society and with the culture we
live in or with climate change or with
political systems what is within my
control right can I share about the
those things can I get involved in some
way can I find a way to connect these
bigger scale ideas with practical
day-to-day applications and can I allow
the fact that it gives me a reason to
wake up in the morning to be a good
enough reason to allow myself to focus
that scope of awareness a bit it's
really hard to feel good about yourself
if you're that baby in a crib endlessly
kicking their legs and not seeing
anything move and in the day and age we
live in it does require a conscious and
intentional focusing of our scope of
awareness down onto what changes we can
make and we are allowed to just give
ourselves permission to focus that scope
of awareness in a smaller way because we
are useless otherwise because if we are
overwhelmed and depressed and anxious
about the world we are not contributing
to it in any meaningful way and it feels
like garbage to exist and we are allowed
to prioritize things that just make it
not feel garbagey to be alive in the
world so being intense about figuring
out what do I actually have the power to
change and how can I show up there as
opposed to stepping back from the whole
game and going it's too big the problems
are too complex I can't do anything that
might be in some respects true you
probably can't solve climate change or
fixed democracy or reform the entire way
we think about mental health but you can
find ways to interact with those
problems in a way that allows you to
feel excited to get up in the morning
and guess what you deserve to feel
excited to get up in the morning you
deserve to find a way to make that
happen for yourself okay that is all
I've got for today on this topic thank
you guys for coming on this journey with
me I've been thinking a lot lately about
self-esteem and the ways in which we
have been approaching it in our social
system in the past couple of decades
that I think has gotten us somewhat off
track it is easier than ever for us to
dissociate and claim a lack of autonomy
over the problems in our our lives and
in the world and I think that doing so
is the fastest route to destroying our
self-esteem and failing to give
ourselves a reason to wake up in the
mornings and face our day so I hope that
some aspect of this has been helpful or
elucidating for any of you guys I know
that all of this has been things that I
have had to put conscious and deliberate
focus on in my own life and I've seen
positive changes so I hope that you do
too and as always I do not at all think
that I have covered everything there is
to cover in this video so let me know
your guys thoughts feelings beliefs
below about self-esteem and how you
Foster in yourself which things have
been helpful for you which books which
mindsets which philosophies which
actions drop it all in the comments
below as always I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
your inner children and that you are
helping them Foster both self-respect
and self-efficacy and I will see you
back here again really soon
foreign
[Music]