hey guys heidi preeb here first of all i
apologize about the drilling i don't
know if you can hear that but it's like
they are constructing another apartment
on top of this apartment right now and
it's quite aggressive on my end so
apologies about that but today i wanted
to come in and talk about something that
we cannot leave unaddressed because when
we talk about the four attachment styles
so anxious avoidant fearful avoidant and
secure one attachment style frequently
gets left out of the conversation and
that attachment style is secure and the
reason why we leave secure out so easily
is because this is the attachment style
that is considered the kind of ideal so
i want to make a distinction between
attachment and let's say personality
systems when you have a personality
system like myers-briggs or the
enneagram there's kind of this
assumption that all types are equal like
there are different strengths and
different weaknesses of all types but
the end goal is to kind of accept
yourself accept the ways you're
different and accept the ways that other
people are different from you and roll
with your natural energy with attachment
styles it's important to keep in mind
that this is not a personality type
system it's about how our early
experiences shape the way that we look
at relationships and interact with
intimate relationships as we grow up
well into adulthood and there are more
and less adaptive ways to approach
relationships so when we talk about
anxious avoidant or fearful avoidant
attachment the end goal if you want to
work with your attachment style is to
inch your way more towards secure now
there is kind of a subset of people who
would say that there is a way to use the
strengths of the insecure styles to your
advantage and we will cover that
viewpoint later on it's a really
interesting one but being securely
attached does serve as a big predictor
for a lot of things related to having
good health happy relationships overall
life satisfaction so it's generally
agreed upon that if given the choice and
we do have the choice to start working
towards secure this is the attachment
style that kind of gives you the best
shot in life if you're in a situation
where being secure is adaptive and
that's something that i talk about in a
different video which i will link below
so today i'm talking about 10 signs that
you might have a secure attachment style
and these signs can be used either to
identify traits within yourself or other
people or to start keeping in mind where
you might want to be working towards if
you are currently insecurely attached
but you want to become more secure this
will give you an idea of what it will
look like when you get there or what it
will start to look like on the way side
number one that you might have a secure
attachment style asking for and
receiving help feels very natural and
comfortable for you so securely attached
individuals were used to having their
needs being met at a very young age
without having to exaggerate or really
push to have their needs met very hard
it was a more natural interplay of hey i
tell you what i'm needing you give it to
me and then we go on with our lives and
as an adult securely attached adults
tend to expect that that same kind of
reciprocation is going to be present in
their adult relationships as well so the
insecure styles might have an almost
impossible time asking for help and an
even harder time receiving it if help is
given but the secure style lives in a
very comfortably interpersonal world so
they feel like i give my help whenever
help is needed and so it's of course
natural that i could reach out to other
people and ask for their help and it's
okay if they can't they'll let me know
but there is nothing inherently wrong
with giving and receiving help for the
securely attached person in fact it's a
realm that they tend to feel pretty
comfortable in sign number two that you
might have a secure attachment style is
that for the most part you don't take
other people's bad moods particularly
personally and there are a couple of
different ways to take things personally
right one way is to think oh my god i
hurt them they're rejecting me and to
kind of have that hyper focus a la
anxious and sometimes fearful avoidance
style on kind of needing people to not
be upset with you or you can get really
annoyed when people are in bad mood and
when they're kind of letting their
negative energy out a la avoidance style
who has learned to suppress all of their
negative feelings so it really bothers
them a lot when it feels like someone
else is showing negative emotions that
they have learned to repress in
themselves and actually this can be true
of the anxious and fearful avoidant as
well but with a securely attached person
they have a really healthy sense of
differentiation so if someone else is in
a bad mood they're likely to just assume
oh something's going on for that person
maybe i should check in see how they're
doing see if they need any help with
anything and if there's something i can
do that's within my means to do then i'd
be happy to help them out and if not
then i'll just carry on with my day
because that person's mood doesn't
really have anything to do with me and
of course this is not to say that
extremes would not affect the securely
attached person like if their partner
comes home and they're really chastising
them or whatever it is of course there's
going to be some dysregulation there but
for the most part there is not this
hyper focus on what's happening with
other people even if you have a securely
attached person who's a really big
extrovert and who does really involve
themselves heavily in the lives of the
people around them who they love they're
able to observe other people's moods
from a little bit of an emotional
distance like they might kind of go oh
that's interesting like i wonder what
would be going into making that person
upset i wonder what would be happening
that would lead them to talk that way to
someone but there isn't going to be this
sense of like personal anger over it or
personal stress over it that they really
feel in their body it's going to be more
situation of if i can help i'll help and
if i can't i can't but either way
they're going to be able to stay
relatively regulated because they don't
have that experience of their brain
getting kind of hijacked and their fight
or flight system working on overdrive
because of the emotions that someone
else is showing that they wish that that
person was not showing so it's
interesting because i just want to make
the point here that a lot of avoidance
think this is the case for them like
they think that other people's moods or
other people's emotions don't affect me
but what's actually happening in a lot
of cases is that the moods of the people
around them are affecting them very
heavily but they're triggering them into
the flight response right so we forget
with fight or flight there's also flight
which is that sense of get me out of
here i don't want to be around this
right so often with avoidantly attached
people someone else displaying a strong
emotion actually does trigger that
flight response which is a very
physiologically aroused state so they
are in ways that they're not necessarily
conscious of quite enmeshed in other
people's emotions in many cases it's
just that the way that they respond to
their attachment system being triggered
is to get out of there as opposed to the
anxious person who will kind of assume
okay i need to get in there and make
sure they're not upset with me or
whatever it is so the secure style is
the only one that kind of has a natural
sense of understanding this is not about
me so even if i care and even if i get
involved i'm not being triggered into a
fight-or-flight response just because
someone else is having a strong
emotional response in my vicinity sign
number three you might have a secure
attachment style is that you're
comfortable consciously adapting your
approach to different relationships so
very often something i see people saying
is if i feel avoidant with some people
and anxious with other people that must
mean i'm fearful avoidant right
it could but actually that's kind of the
natural response for everyone most
people are a little bit avoidant around
people who have a surplus of anxiously
attached energy including other anxious
people so if you get two anxious people
together generally one of them will
actually start avoiding the other a
little bit because both of them are
looking for someone who will meet their
needs and if they're both presenting
their needs very strongly they both look
at each other and are like well you're
not going to meet my needs you're so
preoccupied with your own so generally
to an extent most people will have the
experience of avoiding anxious people a
little bit and the avoidance because
they don't quite give you a lot of
information there is a natural tendency
for all people to kind of over exert
themselves a little bit with avoidance
and what your attachment style is will
depend on whether you overexert yourself
a small amount or a humongous persistent
amount and if you are securely attached
you will absolutely still adapt your
approach to different relationships the
difference is that you will be doing
this consciously whereas the other
styles will be doing it mostly
unconsciously so i'm going to explain
what that means if you have let's say an
avoidant person when they're around
someone who is having a strong anxious
attachment response who is really
displaying a lot of vulnerability or a
lot of emotion they're again potentially
going to get a little bit hijacked by
their nervous system they're going to
start having critical thoughts thinking
this person can't handle themselves i
would know how to handle myself this
outer critic that's judgmental of other
people is going to come online and they
might not consciously realize it but
they're going to have an unconscious
attachment response quite a bit of the
time when they see people expressing
strong emotion and this can also be the
attachment response that gets activated
in them when they're interacting with a
secure person who is displaying a very
healthy and average level of emotional
response but until they start doing the
work the avoidantly attached person
tends to be unconscious of those
attachment triggers going off so they
will be unconsciously avoiding people
who are showing emotion and on the flip
side anxiously attached people will be
unconsciously trying to get closer and
closer and closer to people who they
think would be capable of meeting their
needs in some way with this secure
person they might take a little bit of
space if someone's being overly clingy
with them and they might try a little
bit harder with their friends who don't
open up as easily but these are going to
be conscious choices they're making so
unlike the avoidant who has that outer
critic going that's like that person
can't take care of themselves not like i
know how to take care of myself the
securely attached person has a very
differentiated inner monologue so
someone showing a strong emotional
response does not make their outer
critic come alive they're more likely to
just be like oh i'm okay this person
seems to be showing some really strong
emotions i don't think those emotions
really have much to do with me so i'm
just gonna consciously take a little bit
of space and maybe try to interact with
them again next week in a lower pressure
environment there isn't like a strong
sense of judgment around it it's more
just that they're able to set their
boundaries in a natural way and with an
avoidant person they might go oh this
person seems to need a little bit more
space let's say so i'm going to give
them a little bit more space in our
friendship and i'm not going to be
horrendously insulted if they don't text
me back right away or whatever it is i
just won't rely on that person for
frequent communication so they're able
to kind of naturally understand what's
my stuff what's someone else's stuff and
which boundaries do i need to set with
different people to keep myself okay
based on what their stuff is right so
they will absolutely respond differently
to different friends to different
relationships to different situations
they're in but it's going to be quite
conscious rather than coming from a kind
of triggered fight or flight mode where
they're just reacting to people without
thinking about why they're reacting that
way and then dealing with the fallout of
it later they're able to more clearly
understand what different people's needs
are and adapt their approach accordingly
because again they don't have that
trigger response that happens when they
see someone displaying emotion that they
wouldn't necessarily display whether
that's anxious or avoidance right sign
four that you might have a secure
attachment style is that when you have
an issue with someone you prefer to just
talk it out very directly and very
calmly now there's a reason why the
other attachment styles struggle to do
this so with the anxiously attached
person they might have shame over the
fact that they have so many needs so
they might try to kind of subtly get
their needs met without directly and
clearly saying what the needs are and on
the flip side the avoidant kind of
assumes that they don't need anything
from anyone else so they'll be trying to
unconsciously get their needs met while
consciously pretending that they don't
have any and that creates a whole host
of other problems and the fearful
avoidant will do a little bit of both of
these strategies at different times
however the securely attached person
does not have a lot of shame bound up in
the fact that they have feelings they
either had it modeled early on or they
learned to adopt the mindset that having
feelings and needs that are different
from someone else is nothing to be
ashamed of it doesn't necessarily mean
it's going to threaten the relationship
so there's no reason why you shouldn't
just go to someone tell them how you're
feeling ask them how they're feeling and
then find a mutual resolution to
problems if there is a problem that
needs to be worked out in the
relationship so insecurely attached
people tend to kind of default to the
drama triangle if you don't know what
that is i made a series of videos
talking about attachment in the drama
triangle which i will also link below
this video but the securely attached
person defaults to being outside of the
drama triangle because when you're in
the drama triangle you're trying to get
your needs met without explicitly
stating what your needs are and the
securely attached person is a lot more
likely to just be comfortable directly
stating what their needs are and asking
someone whether or not they can fulfill
that right it doesn't come bound up in
layers of shame in the same way as it
does for the other styles so it's not
scary to have those conversations and if
they don't go well they don't go well
this is not to say that every
interpersonal problem the securely
attached person has gets resolved
quickly and easily and effortlessly but
their approach to the problem tends to
be pretty considerate and pretty direct
and they aren't really scared off by the
fact that there are feelings involved in
the problem that need to be acknowledged
nor are they scared off from analyzing
it through a more logical lens right
they pretty effortlessly combine emotion
and rationality and they don't
necessarily feel like those things are
at odds with each other they feel like
they're two sides of the coin that have
to be considered when you're trying to
make anything work sign number five that
you might have a secure attachment style
is that you're pretty comfortable both
in and out of relationships so you might
have one that you prefer over the other
you might want a long-term relationship
or you might feel a little bit more
comfortable on your own but there is not
a giant difference to you in terms of
how you feel in a romantic relationship
versus how you feel outside of a
romantic relationship your sense of self
feels pretty consistent in both
scenarios and you also don't feel like
having a partner means you have to hide
or give up any part of your sense of
self you are who you are when you're
alone and you are who you are when
you're with a partner so again we can
contrast this with the insecure styles
so the anxiously attached person grows
up kind of feeling a lot of the time
like i am half of a whole i need to find
my other half i need to get my happily
ever after and until they have that
security of a partnership they can feel
a little bit incomplete and on the flip
side we might have the avoidant who
feels like i'm only complete when i am
on my own because partnerships require
you to suppress certain parts of
yourself to give up parts of who you are
and what you want out of life and the
fearful avoidant will feel both of those
things depending on whether they're in
or out of a relationship so they might
feel smothered in a relationship
incomplete outside of one but the
securely attached person feels like yes
of course you have to compromise in a
relationship but i'm going to be careful
to choose relationships where the
compromises that i make actually make my
life better rather than worse because
they're not picking partners from kind
of a triggered fight or flight response
place they're picking partners pretty
consciously and intentionally they tend
to do a better job on average at finding
relationships that don't feel super
smothering or super lonely when they're
inside of them and they're also more
likely to leave those relationships
early on if they figure out that that is
how they feel inside of them they're not
going to go through years of drama
trying to make something work if they
can see from the get-go we just have
value differences we're not necessarily
well suited for each other and that
doesn't mean that breakups don't hurt it
doesn't mean that they never have a
difficult time in romantic relationships
absolutely they do if anything securely
attached people are the people who feel
their emotions in their kind of purest
form because the anxiously attached
individual kind of lives half in a
fantasy in many ways so the emotions
they're feeling are sometimes true
reflections of reality but often their
emotional experience is kind of muddled
in many ways which we will talk about in
other videos so they feel very intensely
but they don't always feel accurately if
that makes sense and the avoidant person
tends to think that they're feeling much
less than they actually are so they can
end up keeping all of these emotions
kind of stored in their body outside of
their conscious awareness and that can
create a whole host of other problems
but the securely attached person for the
most part is able to stay pretty present
with their emotional experiences which
means when they're going through the
grief of losing a relationship they feel
grief when they're going through a
period of their life where they don't
have a lot of people around they feel
lonely there are not these kind of
superficial masks that get unconsciously
placed over their emotional experiences
in either direction so they're able to
feel things quite clearly pain feels
quite painful for them but there's not
this kind of desperate panicked feeling
that either they need to be in a
relationship if they're out of one or
that they need to be out of a
relationship if they're in one they feel
pretty common both scenarios because
they know how to pick relationships
appropriately and also they're better at
keeping their sense of self strong and
stable within a relationship sign number
six that you might have a secure
attachment style is that you feel a
great deal of empathy for other people
but you don't feel overwhelmed by that
empathy so this is not to say that it
never hurts you when you see someone you
love hurting if anything securely
attached people are actually quite good
at talking to other people about their
emotional experiences they believe that
feelings are a natural part of life but
they don't get consumed by other
people's pain so there's not this sense
of kind of merging and losing yourself
in someone else's pain and there's also
not a sense of needing to distance
yourself from it because you're afraid
that you will lose yourself in it if you
get too close the securely attached
person generally had a pretty good
experience of containment from their
caregiver which means the caregiver was
able to respond to their pain to see
them in pain to mirror their pain back
to them but not get overwhelmed by it
themselves so most securely attached
individuals had early experiences with
caregivers who were able to sit with
them through their pain and really show
that they were feeling for them but not
get triggered themselves by the fact
that someone they loved was in pain or
that may have been a skill that someone
who was once insecurely attached learned
later on in life and can now apply to
relationships so with the anxiously
attached style i think that's more the
kind of people who would consider
themselves empaths in a very intense way
i think that when people say the word
empath they can mean a plethora of
different things but i think there's one
kind of meaning of that word where
people are like i get really overwhelmed
and absorbed by other people's pain like
if someone's in pain i can't detach from
it i can't figure out what's them and
what's me so i just feel overwhelmed by
other people's emotions and that is very
often the experience of the anxiously
attached individual who does not have
healthy differentiation so it's kind of
like if someone i love is feeling
something i have to also feel that thing
right it can't be i feel for you but i
am not personally overwhelmed by that
emotion or deeply entrenched in it right
and with the avoidant style you often
have the opposite like they might really
struggle when someone else is feeling a
strong emotion because they don't know
how to connect with it even if they want
to they might struggle and kind of go
well i don't really feel that emotion i
don't have access to my full emotional
range so it's hard for me to find
something in myself that can help me
understand what you're feeling but
because the securely attached person
does have access to a much wider kind of
palette of emotions if you will it's not
that difficult for them to sit with
someone who's in pain or who's
struggling and to really understand what
they're going through to get their point
of view to find something in themselves
that helps them to kind of understand
what that person's going through but at
the end of the day they're not going to
feel kind of overwhelmed by that
person's pain they're going to be able
to feel for them but also know that pain
is not mine and of course other people
have emotions there's nothing
uncomfortable there sign number seven
that you might have a secure attachment
style you're pretty good at setting
meaningful goals for yourself but you
also know how to work collaboratively
with people so to set meaningful goals
for our lives we need to be able to do
two things well we need to be able to
tune into our emotional selves and
figure out who we are what speaks to us
in life and what we want to pursue and
we also need to be able to tune into our
practical selves and go what makes sense
what is going to give me the best most
cohesive experience of life and how do i
marry those two things and find goals
for my life that i both feel very
aligned with and that makes sense in
both ends of the insecure spectrum tend
to struggle with some aspect of that
meaningful goal setting right but the
secure person generally they're pretty
good at figuring out what they need to
do for themselves to keep themselves
aligned with where they want to go in
life but they're also pretty good at
figuring out okay how do i merge my life
with someone else's if let's say i get
into a serious partnership or how do i
take the needs and wants and emotions of
my loved ones into consideration when
i'm making major decisions and where do
i have to draw boundaries around that
now again this is not to say that the
securely attached person never has
conflicts it's not to say that they
never get it wrong in these areas but
it's to say that they don't have a
specific lifelong persistent struggle in
one area or the other right they don't
struggle to set meaningful goals on
their own as a general rule and they
also don't struggle to collaborate and
make compromises as a general rule
generally they have a perfectly average
ability maybe above average ability
since we are contrasting them with
insecure styles to navigate both the
solo aspects of life and the
interpersonal aspects and they consider
both types of goals personal ones and
interpersonal ones to be meaningful and
worth considering heavily sign number
eight that you might have a secure
attachment style is that you're
comfortable depending on people so i
think that these days the word
dependency has become kind of a dirty
word like we see being dependent on
people as this bad thing that no one
should be and yes you should absolutely
not be completely dependent on someone
right so you should not be putting all
of your well-being in the hands of
someone else you should never have a
relationship where it feels like i will
not be okay i will not be able to take
care of myself if this relationship
should end but it's a great and normal
thing to have a healthy level of
dependency on people right so to say i
can trust let's say my spouse or my
friends to follow through on their
promises and because i can trust that i
can outsource certain things to them and
if that stops working for us then we can
renegotiate what we're outsourcing to
each other and what we're relying on
each other for but securely attached
people tend to be somewhere around the
middle of the spectrum between
codependency which is when we're overly
dependent on someone else and counter
dependency which is when we don't feel
comfortable relying on anyone for
anything securely attached people are
comfortable trusting the people in their
lives to show up in the way that they
agree to show up they tend to have very
explicit expectations and agreements in
their relationships because they
approach people directly and take people
at face value when they say they can or
can't do things for them and that does
not mean that they never get burned it
does not mean that their trust is never
betrayed absolutely all of those things
happen to securely attach people the way
they happen to other people as well but
over time they tend to learn how to root
out who they can trust and who they
can't and they are always aiming towards
relationships where it is okay to be
dependent on each other in healthy ways
and that's what we call interdependence
when you're okay on your own and another
person is okay on their own and you
figure out together where can we rely on
and support each other in order to make
our lives mutually better right
interdependence sign number nine that
you might have a secure attachment style
is that conflict is uncomfortable for
you but it's not the end of the world
and you're able to tolerate the
discomfort that comes along with
conflict so what you'll often see with
the insecure styles is that conflict is
so unbearable for these styles that
they'll default to one response or the
other so the anxiously attached person
might go okay i'll just give over
everything i need and i'll fawn over
this person and try to get them to kind
of subtly meet my needs by first me
meeting so many of their needs that now
there's this unbalance in the
relationship and the avoidantly attached
person might feel like conflict is so
uncomfortable and i also don't see a
point in it because i can always meet
all of my own needs so anytime there's
an issue in a relationship why talk it
out when i could just go away make
myself feel better on my own but the
securely attached person generally has a
pretty good sense of when an issue needs
to be addressed in order for a
relationship to start functioning in a
smoother way and they know that that
isn't necessarily going to be a
comfortable conversation right they
might not like conflict they might not
like having difficult conversations but
they're willing to have them and they
know that they're an option
right a lot of the time with insecurely
attached styles they don't even really
understand on like a gut level that
having a direct conversation that just
resolves an issue is possible they might
have so many internalized experiences of
conflict as highly activating and highly
negative that they think any conflict is
going to be like that but with the
securely attached person they either saw
early examples of or they consciously
learned that conflict can be resolved
peacefully that you can resolve conflict
while keeping your respect for the other
person and vice versa so while they
don't necessarily like conflict or want
to have difficult uncomfortable
emotionally vulnerable conversations
they see them as a kind of necessary
evil and so they're much more likely to
both initiate and respond positively to
those conversations when they come up
sign number 10 that you might have a
secure attachment style is that you tend
to take a fairly balanced view of other
people's behavior so this often shows up
especially when the securely attached
person is talking about someone who is
an attachment figure to them so that
might be their parents it might be their
partner and they're able to really
understand that people are complex and
nuanced and that people are not all good
or all bad so they're often able to give
you very fair very kind of balanced
views where they see both what their
parents did wrong and what they did
right and the same goes for their
partner so with the anxious attachment
style you can get this kind of
idealization of partners so their
partners can do no wrong until suddenly
maybe they get anxiously activated and
then their partner can do no right and
with the avoidant you often have this
kind of glossy film over the past where
it's like oh i had a great childhood
nothing went wrong my parents did
everything right no parent does
everything right first of all but then
with partnerships they might be hyper
critical and feel like every emotion
that someone is showing that they
personally would not feel in that
situation is irrational with the
anxiously attached person they often see
their partners as kind of idealized
until they don't anymore and they see
themselves as very innocent so they have
a really hard time generally seeing
themselves as having done anything bad
or wrong and then on the flip side of
things they'll have the avoidant who
actually exonerates their caregivers
quite a bit so for example if they've
been abused as a child the avoidant
individual is going to be much more
likely to go well i deserved it they
were just teaching me a lesson there's
this kind of hardness to them where they
believe that people who express
victimhood are just playing the victim
they suck it up and they learn their
lesson so why can't everyone else and on
the flip side of that we'll have the
anxiously attached style who's more
likely to believe i am so innocent i
have pure intentions which means i
cannot do anything wrong that's a very
common logical mistake of the anxious
attachment style they think that good
intentions always translates to good
behavior and they really struggle to
understand that they can do something
with good intentions but still cause
pain to another person so they tend to
externalize quite a bit they tend to
assume i'm innocent so there's a problem
i'm having with someone else it must be
because they're toxic or a narcissist or
whatever and in the middle of that
spectrum we have the securely attached
person who sees a great deal of nuance
who can understand things like someone
can go in with good intentions and mess
up and do something wrong but they also
understand some people are
self-interested and have bad intentions
and you have to just learn how to draw
boundaries around those people so that
you don't become impacted by their bad
behavior so with secure attachment we
see a lot of grace being given in the
way that they analyze other people but
we also see healthy boundaries being
drawn so they don't really need people
to be all good or all bad they more
naturally understand that everyone is a
mix of both of those things and their
responsibility as a human being is to
figure out how they can keep themselves
aware and safe in different
relationships based on how other people
are showing up so again when you ask
them about someone's character
particularly someone they're close to
like their caregiver or their partner
you don't really get these extremes you
don't get them being extremely critical
of or extremely idealizing of someone
who they're close to in general you tend
to get a very respectful and fair and
balanced view of people so they might
kind of laugh a little bit talking about
their quirks that their partner has that
bother them a bit or they might be able
to say you know my parents couldn't
always be there for us in the ways that
we needed because they had all of these
circumstances going on in their own
lives that made it really difficult for
them to know how to show up in an
emotionally available way and this is
actually often a very strong sign of
someone who has earned secure attachment
is if they truly did have an early life
that was very abusive that maybe caused
them to develop an insecure attachment
style growing up once they earn security
they're able to look back even on true
abuse that they've experienced and
understand it from both an emotional and
a rational perspective so that doesn't
mean they're saying what was done to
them was right but they're not stuck in
that mindset of this person was an evil
villain and that's why it happened
they're usually able to kind of
understand there were circumstances that
went into why my parents or why my
abusers were the way they were and i
understand where those kind of danger
signs are so now i know how not to
repeat that behavior there is a much
more balanced view overall of both who
the people are in situations and also
what circumstances surround those
situations and how both things need to
be worked with in order to have healthy
and balanced relationships so again a
strong sign of secure attachment is that
they're able to see a lot of nuance and
really understand that both good and bad
intentions and actions can co-exist
within a singular person and again this
is why generally securely attached
people don't struggle as much as the
other styles might struggle to apologize
because they understand i can go into a
situation with good intentions and still
accidentally do someone harm and it's
not as big of a stretch for them to be
able to realize that when someone comes
to them and say you've hurt me they can
kind of more naturally shift into that
person's perspective and go oh i see
here why that was hurtful to this person
even though i didn't mean it to be that
way so i can acknowledge that person's
worldview let them know you know that
wasn't my intention but i see i've hurt
you and i really apologize and let's
talk about how to create a better
situation moving forward and again it's
not that it's always going to be put in
perfect language it's not that they're
never going to get a little bit annoyed
or uncomfortable in the process it's not
that they never make judgments about
other people but for the most part
securely attached people are able to
take a much more nuanced view of people
because they are not chronically being
put in that kind of fight-or-flight
response like the anxious and the
avoidant styles and the fearful
avoidance style more often are all right
i think that's all that i have to say
about secure attachment for today let me
know in the comments what your thoughts
are what your experiences are if you are
on an attachment healing journey and
you're starting to see any of these
signs emerge in yourself that's an
awesome thing take a moment to feel
proud of yourself and let me know how
that's going for you until next time i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and i will
see you back here again
i mean let's be real tomorrow
[Music]