hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my channel
today I am making a video that is very
Niche like I'm curious about who has
found their way here and uh what your
experiences have been because I imagine
if you resonate with this title or have
a even passing curiosity about this
title we have a lot of stuff to talk
about so I will get right into my
motivation for making this video as well
as some caveats about how I want to
approach this topic those of you who've
been following my channel for a while
know that part of what has been helping
me on my own attachment and cptsd
healing Journey has been practicing a
philosophy called radical honesty
radical honesty is in some ways exactly
what it sounds like in some ways not at
all but essentially a lot of what it is
is learning to notice when we're being
dishonest both with ourselves and other
people and learning skills for
communicating more honestly in the
moment one of the kind of core
philosophies that's at the root of
radical honesty is that the majority of
the suffering we do in life is created
by lying so when we are dishonest with
ourselves and or other people we are
creating a whole bunch of roadblocks for
ourselves in a whole bunch of ways in
which we are holding ourselves back
creating intention internally and
externally and overall just not allowing
ourselves to experience the full breadth
of what is available to us on this
planet Earth while we are here so part
of what's been really interesting for me
as I go through the Journey of
practicing radical honesty and
integrating it in some ways into my real
life outside of like workshops and
radical honesty events and in other
cases not at all integrating it into
certain situations is that I'm noticing
why I lie like I'm noticing which
situations come up where it truly is
slightly more adaptive for me to tell a
lie than to tell the truth and which
situations it is historically been more
adaptive for me to either lie or omit
certain pieces of information even from
my own processing and those of you who
have watched a lot of my attachment
related videos know that a lot of what
attachment theory is looking at is what
information do we naturally omit from
processing and secure attachment is all
about having a healthy balance of
processing both emotional and
intellectual information but people who
have complex PTSD which is a lot of
people with insecure attachment Styles
particularly those with fearful Styles I
imagine are a lot more likely to have
traits of cptsd the same with people who
have been through family scapegoating so
if you have been following my family
role series and you relate to the
scapegoat it is not unlikely that you
ended up with cptsd symptoms and in this
video I'm not going to go into what
complex PTSD is the reason being is that
that would be an entire video in and of
itself but I do encourage you to check
out the book complex PTSD from surviving
to thriving by Pete Walker it is maybe
my favorite psychology book I have ever
read and that is saying a lot I read an
average of two to three psych books a
week complex PTSD does such an
incredible job of looking at how early
wounding impacts our adult functioning
and today I want to talk specifically
about how early wounding especially
early wounding that that leaves us with
complex PTSD patterning impacts our
ability to be aware of and to tell the
truth and the reason I want to do this
is not because I'm trying to shame
anybody for being dishonest and not
because I'm trying to moralize in any
capacity about this right what I want to
do is just give you some tools and some
things to think about and be aware of if
you identify as having complex PTSD
symptoms and you identify as someone who
struggles to show up honestly and
authentically in the world I think that
a lot of the reason why a lot of us who
have complex PTSD symptoms really
struggle with close connections with
maintaining intimate relationships with
feeling confident and like we have high
self-esteem is because it was highly
adaptive for us on many levels when we
were young to be dishonest or to Omit
information from our own awareness so
then we developed these patterns of not
noticing the truth and not communicating
stating the truth and those patterns led
to a lot of maladaptive and
dysfunctional traits as adults that a
lot of us aren't even all that
consciously aware of right so this video
is largely just me sharing some patterns
of lying that I've become aware of in
myself as I've gone through this process
of trying to become more and more honest
in the world and in my relationships and
if any of this is relatable to you I'm
hoping that you can use it as a means of
unpacking whether or not it might be
safe to now tell the truth in some of
these scenarios or to identify
situations you could put yourself in
where it's easier to be more authentic
and more honest so again this is not
about shaming or blaming anyone who has
cptsd for lying it is about championing
you for the ways in which you have
survived and adapted in the world and
reminding you that maybe now there is a
way forward that is even more adaptive
that feels a whole lot better and more
intrinsically regulating and fulfilling
so here we go without further Ado 10
reasons why people with complex PTSD
might lie reason one you are having a
fun response this is probably in my
opinion one of the biggest reasons why
people lie without knowing they're lying
so Pete Walker's book he walks you
through what a fun response is it is
part of what he calls the 4f so when
your sympathetic nervous system is
activated because you perceive yourself
to be in danger we commonly think of
going into either fight or flight mode
he argues we go into either fight flight
freeze or Fawn responses and when we are
fawning what we are doing is essentially
doing some version of what you might
otherwise think of as people pleasing so
temporarily shutting down your body and
your mind to your own desires and needs
and focusing on giving the person in
front of you what they want because your
body is in fear and your body assumes
that if you can give the person what
they want then they will not harm you
now the fond response is a very complex
psychological phenomenon that I'm
actually going to film a whole other
video unpacking so when that video comes
out I will link it in the description of
this video but essentially what you need
to know about the Fawn response is that
when you are doing this when you are
going along with what someone else wants
when you are people pleasing when you
are deciding that the easiest way
forward is to go with the flow and be
easy going often you are not overtly
lying in the way that we tend to think
about people lying you are not sitting
there with this Burning personal desire
that you're refusing to disclose what
you're actually doing is thinking okay I
have like a list of 10 things at any
given point in time that I want and
right now the thing on the top of the
list is harmony because I feel
threatened and even that is often not
the most conscious thought process what
you might be feeling in that moment is I
don't really have a preference what you
might be feeling in that moment is I
have a strong preference for not
starting conflict and in in the moment
that is your authentic want your
authentic want is to give the other
person what they want so that the
problem or the potential conflict goes
away however later on once you are safe
again so you are no longer in that state
of sympathetic nervous system activation
where your primary goal is keeping
yourself safe you might suddenly realize
whoa I did have a want that I was at the
time not conscious of what I actually
wanted was X Y or Z but in that moment
what I wanted was to give the other
person what they wanted so that it
wouldn't start a whole thing but now now
that I'm safe and regulated my secondary
wants or my more authentic wants are
coming to the surface and the problem
this tends to get us into is when we're
harboring those secondary wants we don't
say them in the moment often it builds
resentment right we start resenting the
other person for being so overt about
what they want and in the moment we Fawn
and we give them what they want and then
we feel perpetually frustrated that our
true wants which we might not realize
until later go unacknowledged in the
dynamic and this is a complex issue
that's the thing about complex PTSD the
problems it tends to give way to are
complex and I'm not here to teach you
how to solve every single one of these
problems in the span of this video I'm
just here to raise awareness about areas
where you might be self-abandoning or
lying without realizing it and I think
this is one of the biggest ones for
people with cptsd is when your survival
system is activated which is much more
often than the average person with less
trauma than you you are likely to be in
a fun response and to not be aware of
what you want and then be unable to
communicate it and I will give a small
piece of advice it's probably helpful in
your Intimate Relationships to make
people aware of this to let your partner
or your closest friends know hey
sometimes I freeze up in the moment I
don't know what I want and so I'll tell
you I'm fine with something and later
realize that I actually had another
underlying want that I wasn't conscious
of at the time is it okay with you if I
come to you later on and just fill you
in on what I wanted even if it's too
late for me to get that just so you're
aware of what my underlying wants and
needs tend to be and the more
comfortable you can get doing this the
more likely you are to start actually
deactivating your own Fawn response
around that person right if you have a
pattern of going to them and having the
things you want and need to be accepted
even if it's later on after the fact
your body might start logging oh this
person actually does listen to me when I
bring up what I want or need and now
maybe in the moment eventually after
enough repetition my body can start
calming down not having that fun
response come online and I can learn to
access my own emotional state in that
instance and communicate it at the time
but again this is a process right and
you might find there are situations
where you go to someone after the fact
let them know what was happening and
they're not receptive to that or they
kind of like your fun response right and
that in and of itself is information
about that maybe not being the safest or
most healthy relationship for you to be
in doesn't mean you have to do anything
about it it's just information another
area where people with complex PTSD tend
to start lying very young in my opinion
like this is a pattern of lying that
will start as soon as they go to school
uh or are in other situations whether
it's group sports or any type of social
interaction where they're interacting
with children from different backgrounds
people with complex PTSD lie to seem
normal so there is a book called adult
children of Alcoholics and it is this
kind of movement spurred in the 80s
where they started noticing these
patterns and traits that were consistent
and for children who'd grown up with
alcoholic parents and then they started
realizing actually any sort of family
dysfunction can lead a child to have
these traits and one of the traits is
you are constantly guessing at what
normal is and I think that this applies
to a lot of people with complex PTSD
because their home environments their
early environments were not necessarily
normal or some of the situations they've
been through in life were not normal or
the way that they thought about
themselves was an internalized belief
that they are not normal right I think
it's very very common if not a defining
trait of having complex PTSD to think of
yourself as not to normal and to think
of yourself as othered or outcasted or
unacceptable unlovable in some way which
is not true at all by the way but if you
have complex PTSD you probably think
that so I think from the time that
people with complex PTSD are young
children they have learned to lie to
socially blend in we all need social
interaction we need it and to be fair
everybody does this to an extent you do
not have to have an extensive history of
trauma to want to blend in and to
sometimes fudge the truth to do that but
I think that this is a particularly
prevalent and obvious one for those who
do have complex PTSD is because you
don't really know what normal is but you
have the sense that you'll get outcasted
if you don't fit the normal mold you end
up having to tell more lies than the
average person who is closer to that
normal mold than you are because they've
had more common experiences in order to
get the same social acceptance right so
this is actually highly adaptive for a
lot of kids and it's not something that
I think anyone would blame or shame a
child for but it is something that as we
grow up we learn to blame and shame
ourselves for rather than accepting yeah
the reason why I don't always act like
my true self the reason I don't always
connect really deeply with people is
because I learned from a young age that
to get Social acceptance you have to lie
about who you are and lie about what
you've been through right so this is
once again not about shaming or blaming
you for this it's actually about giving
yourself some self-compassion around it
right you fought to survive and part of
fighting for survival means fighting for
social inclusion and that's what you've
been doing for a lot of your life if you
have complex PTSD chances are it led to
some small or humongous lies along the
way
now number three is a big one because
this is not just about lying to other
people this is about a really deep self
lie and this is that from the time
they're very young many people with
complex PTSD because they have this
fragmented and disoriented sense of who
they are because their true self was not
mirrored back properly to them through
their caregivers much of the time you
actually might have a story about who
you are that is not at all true to who
you actually are
so what that means is that let's say you
were the scapegoat of the family and you
came into the world as a person who
wants to do good and make other people
feel good and generally get along with
people but you're chronically being told
there's something wrong with you you're
too angry you can't get along with other
kids There's Something Wicked or evil
inside of you and because as a child you
really trust your parents view of you
they're kind of your entire window to
the outside world you might actually
take on those Twisted points of view as
your identity so you might truly believe
I am a bad person I want bad things to
happen to other people there's something
wrong with me I'm defective I have anger
issues I'm a monster whatever it is that
you are told repeatedly as a child
before you're old enough to have enough
exposure to other points of view that
would allow you to internalize different
things you might latch on to these views
of who you are that are inaccurate and
that on some level you know to be
inaccurate because you can feel in your
body what you want and no child wants to
be evil or bad or wrong or angry no
child wants that there are no children
who are just born like that okay but you
might have been told you were and so
growing up you might convey that to
other people you might look for
opportunities you can be in where a bad
person would be in that situation or if
you hurt someone instead of going oh
that was an accident I didn't realize
that that was going to be hurtful for
someone you might automatically hear
this voice in your head that goes you're
a bad person you want other people to be
unhappy and you're going to believe that
about yourself so the child who's been
scapegoated or the child who has gone
through a lot of trauma related to other
people telling them negative things
about their character is likely to take
on those things as who they believe they
are right and this is the beginning of
the lies that we tell ourselves and it's
really hard to be honest and authentic
about who you are if you don't actually
know who you are right if you have all
this language given to you by other
people but it doesn't quite match up
with the way you feel inside it's
confusing and it leads to you giving
people conflicting and confusing
messages because you don't actually know
what's true this is particularly potent
when it comes to fearful avoidant
attachment which is often again related
to complex PTSD to family scapegoating
to these adverse young experiences there
is a disoriented sense of self so you
don't really know who you are or what
you want because it's hard to separate
out what you've been told from what you
feel and experienced to be true and so
that can lead to a lot of mixed messages
getting sent out a lot of contradictions
that other people might think you are
lying about when truly those
contradictions exist within yourself and
your own psyche and even you don't
really know who you are or what your
true identity is reason number four you
might have learned to lie from a young
age is you learn to lie to avoid loss
so when you are a child the biggest
possible threat to a child is getting
taken away or separated from their
caregiver it does not matter for 99 of
children if their caregivers are abusive
if they're unable to take care of them
if they are neglectful there is
something so Primal that attaches us to
our caregivers because from the time we
are young we learn based on the fact
that they Keep Us Alive with their
literal bodies if you are breastfeeding
as an infant I will die if I'm separated
from my caregiver that is what children
believe on an instinctual level so it
often does not matter how dangerous or
unfit their caregivers are the thought
of being separated from them of being
let's say put into foster care or taken
away by Social Services is threatening
on a core basic survival level to most
children so when that sense of survival
is so strong theological thing to do is
to act like everything is fine at home
even if it's not to act like if you are
being abused even by someone outside of
the family if you believe that there is
some sort of threat to your connections
with other people with your family with
the people you think are protecting you
if you are to disclose what's actually
happening you're probably going to lie
about it that's a really strong
incentive to lie when you are a child
and I think what's important to note
here is that that idea that you have to
lie to avoid loss becomes encoded in the
body like you might now make an
unconscious association between keeping
people's secrets and keeping them in
your life right so when you meet someone
who let's say abuses you as an adult
physically or psychologically or
sexually or whatever it is you might
feel compelled to keep that secret
because you have this response in your
mind that's like telling the truth means
dealing with incalculable loss so you
are naturally incentivized inside of
your own mind by your own conditioning
to keep people's deep dark secrets and
so you start lying on behalf of other
people another adult child trait is
being loyal to a fault and I think that
this is kind of all wrapped up in that
like we believe that telling the truth
leads to loss so lie to keep other
people's secrets and we lie really well
in those cases most of the time now so
far we've talked mostly about the lies
that you will turn to in childhood if
you have complex PTSD but I want to talk
about how these Tendencies and these
patterns of lying mature and develop
over the course of your life and express
themselves in adulthood so the adult
version of lying for social inclusion is
lying to secure resources so lying to
get a certain job or to get money or to
be able to sign a lease on an apartment
when actually you have a really bad
credit history by the time you have
reached adulthood as a person with
complex PTSD you probably have a couple
of comorbid mental health issues you've
been dealing with on and off for years
you probably have patterns of unstable
relationships that you've been
struggling with because complex PTSD
makes intimacy really difficult you
might have struggled to hold down a
steady job to keep your commitments in
various areas because of all of these
mental challenges and blocks that you
have in the way of day-to-day
functioning so you might learn to lie to
do whatever it takes for you to get
money to secure a place to live get
ahead in life whether this means making
up elaborate stories about why you don't
have a reference to give in the
workplace whether it means faking a
reference for an apartment whether it
means like forging documents or hiding
the money you make or any long sequence
of survival skills you you have picked
up over the course of your life to cover
up for all of the other ways in which
you struggle to do things in the linear
way that other people who do not have a
lung trauma history seem to be able to
easily do things this is again why we
call complex trauma complex it has its
tentacles in every area of your life for
most people who struggle with complex
trauma right and by the time you are 20
30 40 years old you are probably already
covering up for years and years of
circumnavigating the rules and getting
around certain barriers and having to
find creative ways to keep yourself
resourced and alive and thriving in this
world because chances are the linear
Pathways did not work for you were not
an option for you because you had
different needs than the people who were
on those linear Pathways even if the
different needs was let's say you
couldn't focus properly you have a
really poor attention span because you
frequently dissociate as a trauma
response right that's going to make
school a lot harder for you and if
school is a lot harder for you getting a
regular job might be a lot harder for
you and if getting a regular job is a
lot harder for you you might have to
jump through a lot of Hoops to do a lot
of different things for work that might
now make it difficult to sign a lease on
an apartment because your landlord wants
proof of employment but you don't have
stable employment and if you need a
co-signer in the event that you don't
have stable employment you might not
have a co-signer because maybe you don't
speak to your family or maybe you can't
hold down a serious relationship with
someone who could co-sign so all of this
turns into this web of scenarios where
you are constantly triaging the next
great emergency in your life and again I
say this without judgment I say it with
the utmost compassion because I
understand life is not as easy for you
as it's been for other people chances
are and chances are you have learned to
lie about your circumstances as a means
of getting the resources you need to
stay alive and I applaud you for doing
that nobody on this planet is more
resourceful than a complex PTSD Survivor
nobody reason six you are likely to lie
if you have complex PTSD as an adult is
toxic shame
so John Bradshaw who's a brilliant
psychologist wrote a book called healing
the shame that binds you that talks all
about this concept of toxic shame Pete
Walker also goes over it extensively in
his complex PTSD book but essentially to
have toxic shame means to have a shame
bound identity so to think of yourself
as inherently shameful at the core and
when you think of yourself as inherently
shameful at the core you start telling a
lot of lies to try to avoid other people
seeing that core and I don't think
people like properly understand just how
deep this runs because the problem is
when you internalize the idea I am
shameful at my core and then you let's
say fail at something or struggle with
something people who are not shame bound
would go oh I failed oh I struggled at
something I must need to learn some new
skills I must just need some help people
with toxic shame do not think those
things they think I failed or I
struggled because I am bad bad pathetic
disgusting unworthy at my core and then
it gets really hard to try again and
this is the lifelong process of self
gaslighting based on what other people
told you when you were a child who did
not know better and this is in my
opinion the biggest thing that holds
people with complex PTSD back and this
is the thing that makes me angry every
time I meet someone with complex PTSD
and they talk about themselves this way
I want to go back in time and I want to
shake whoever first told them those
things about themselves and I want to
just overload them with the message that
they are worthy of love and that they
are worthy of trying and failing and
that not meaning that there's something
wrong with them that they are deserving
of help that they are no different than
anyone else out there who's trying and
failing who is needing help deserving of
support the only difference is that they
don't think they can ask for it if you
have complex PTSD you think that
whatever happens to you that is bad was
in some convoluted way caused by the
fact that there is something deeply
wrong with you and oh my God you are so
wrong that is so not the case it's so
not the case but it's also ridiculous
like truly ridiculous how wide-reaching
this is I think one of the clearest
examples for myself is that I have had
chronic pain since I was about 16 years
old undiagnosed likely psychosomatic a
trauma response stress response and
every time I am experiencing a chronic
pain flare-up I think that I'm faking it
this is absolutely nonsensical because I
am not faking these flare-ups when I
have a chronic pain flare-up it is pain
like I have never experienced in any
other situation in my life like I can't
get out of bed I can't stand up and
every time I get one of these flare-ups
without fail
without fail I start berating myself for
being a little baby and I start telling
myself like anyone else would just suck
this up and get through it no they would
not anyone else feeling that level of
pain I think would admit themselves to
the hospital but because of this
conditioning that there's something
deeply shameful and wrong with me it has
taken me so long to accept that when I'm
in pain I deserve medical attention like
I deserve to have a doctor who knows
about this any other person would have a
doctor who knows about this and would
run tests on them but there's this
belief when you have complex PTSD that
anything bad that's happening to you is
just because you are being over dramatic
or because you should have known how to
prevent it right so there is such a deep
deep-seated sense of Shame when you have
complex PTSD that it overtakes
rationality it literally overtakes your
ability to understand which resources
are available to you you are so quick to
assume that you are just being
irrational and that your thought process
is wrong because you've been told that
on some level for a very long time that
you will end up lying about things
because you're gaslighting yourself
toxic shame makes you think that this
secret goopy inner Badness inside of you
that you just magically have is the
cause of everything that goes wrong in
life it's not the truth but you think it
is and so you end up telling lies
because you think that the truth is that
you're just not trying hard enough or
that you're just shameful and it's your
fault things went wrong right when in
reality if you just told people the
truth probably they'd be like oh my God
I'm so sorry can I come help you with
anything but like I said this stuff runs
so deep it runs so deep that we don't
even think to tell the truth much of the
time like truly doesn't even occur to
people with complex PTSD that there are
situations where they can tell the truth
because they have grown up with a
pattern of lying about things that they
don't even know they're lying about
truly don't even know
um and I imagine like if you have
complex PTSD you know what I'm talking
about and if you're listening to me talk
about it and you don't have it
um
yeah it's hard to understand it really
is like I I could not imagine being an
outsider trying to make sense of why
someone is lying like that
and understand that they're lying to
themselves first
and that self lie comes from initial
lies that someone else told them like
when I started experiencing chronic pain
I was constantly told that I was faking
it and making it up and it wasn't
actually happening so I literally
thought it was true I thought that it
was I thought it was like
yeah it's bizarre it's truly bizarre
what the human mind can do but anyways
I'm going to move on to the next point
so reason number seven is in my opinion
probably the most common reason why
people with complex PTSD tell overt lies
so lies that you know are lies you know
what the truth is but you stand in front
of a different person and tell them
something that you have consciously
thought about that is not the truth and
this is that having complex PTSD similar
to what we talked about before with like
getting an apartment or like securing
work puts you in a lot of weird
scenarios that other people would not be
able to properly advise you on so you
end up lying to them because it's easier
to just not have the conversation
because they would see what you're doing
as a problem whereas you know the thing
you're doing is actually the solution to
a different problem maybe you're in an
unhealthy relationship maybe you're in a
relationship where if you told people
about it they would be like oh that
sounds unhealthy or abusive and you
should get out but you know that you
would not be financially secure if you
were to leave that relationship you know
that you don't have many other sources
of emotional support if you were to
leave that relationship and this is not
me advocating for staying an unhealthy
or abusive relationships I'll leave some
resources in the description of this
video for places you can go to like find
support and find help if you find
yourself in one of those situations but
I do think it's very common for people
with complex PTSD to end up in unhealthy
relationships and feel like they can't
tell other people the truth about what's
going on in their relationships because
other people don't understand that those
relationships are well you the one in it
might realize you're in a bad situation
you also see the problems that that
relationship is solving the same thing
could be said for addiction people might
look at your drinking or your drug use
and go that's a problem of course it is
and you know it is and still it's the
only way that you are able to wake up in
the mornings it is the only way that you
are able to get your traumatic
flashbacks to stop right and again I'm
also not advocating for drinking or drug
use but I'm saying to the Survivor using
substances is often a solution or a way
of managing your own symptoms of trauma
if you don't have the help for dealing
with the trauma itself and if you were
to tell other people the full extent of
how you're using substances they would
be like whoa you need to stop and if you
were to be forced to stop now one of
your coping mechanisms is gone right and
again I am not advocating for drug use
for alcohol use for unhealthy
relationships or staying in abusive
situations all I'm doing here is saying
that people with complex PTSD often find
themselves in situations where they are
choosing the lesser of all evils right
where none of the options available to
them were particularly good so they are
choosing the one that allows them to
function the best they possibly can
within the situation that they're in and
then they might lie to cover up some of
the negative aspects of whatever it is
that they have chosen because they know
that for other people that thing would
be a problem whereas for them it is more
a solution than it is a problem and so
that's where you start getting the overt
lies right my partner is wonderful our
relationship is great I didn't make it
to the event last night because I got
tired and fell asleep not because I was
in the middle of an altercation sober I
don't use I don't drink whatever it is
all of these conscious lies that you
learn to tell are often cover-ups for
situations that you know other people
will not understand or that they will
will judge you harshly for and again
complex trauma is complex there's not
easy answers to any of these right the
best possible solution is if you're able
to get help and you're able to let's say
find a counselor who deals with complex
trauma and who knows the ins and outs of
it that's likely to be someone who is
understanding of why you're doing the
things you're doing that other people
might frown upon or might judge you for
because they understand that you are
fighting for your own Survival and you
always have been reason number eight why
people with complex PTSD might lie this
is one that overlaps really neatly with
anxious attachment but it can be
slightly different between complex PTSD
and anxious attachment or you can have
both
um but you might tell overt lies so
again lies that you know you are telling
in situations where you have gotten
triggered or you've had a trauma
response and you know that you have to
come up with some reason that's
acceptable for other people as to why
you reacted the way you did but but you
might not even know why you had that
response right when we have trauma
especially when we have trauma when we
don't know we have trauma especially
especially when we have complex trauma
and we don't know we have complex trauma
complex trauma involves something called
emotional flashbacks emotional
flashbacks are essentially too complex
trauma what regular flashbacks are to
PTSD so most people are Vaguely Familiar
with PTSD they're familiar with the
concept of having a flashback where you
might have visual Recollections of
something that happened to you where you
might have extreme nightmares where
you're let's say back in a war zone or
back in a situation where your life was
threatened with complex PTSD you have
emotional flashbacks so when you're
having an emotional flashback you feel
as though your body is responding to a
past traumatic situation but you don't
have the visual component so you're
still kind of seeing the room you're in
you're still aware of where you are but
your body kind of thinks it's in the
past and starts emotionally responding
as though you're in a traumatic past
situation so this might look like sudden
outbursts of anger or dissociation where
you're totally not present and other
people can kind of tell you're not
responding appropriately this can look
like total shutdown and panic and
withdrawal and if you are experiencing
an emotional flashback you have to find
a way to explain to other people why you
are having a reaction that doesn't fit
the situation but often you don't even
know why that's happening right very
very few complex PTSD survivors can
point to the direct correlation between
their emotional flashback and the weird
reaction they're having in the present
our bodies store a lot of responses and
those responses aren't always tied one
to one to specific past memories it's
more of an accumulation of feelings and
fears and survival responses that live
in our body right but if you've just
blown up at someone and now you have to
explain why that happened you're gonna
try to find a reason to explain why it
happened and if you are very unconscious
of this and you don't don't even know
for example what a trigger is which most
of us until the last like three four
years had no idea of you're just going
to try to make up a reason that fit the
situation and you might also be doing
this for yourself like if you got into a
fight with your partner and you exploded
on them you might think to yourself they
must have done something that was truly
that bad for me to be that angry so you
might be like I know you're cheating
give me your phone I want to go through
it right you might think that the
intense reaction you're having has to be
a true representative of the present
situation that's when you have little to
no awareness of the fact that you're
even experiencing a trigger right but
there might also be a level of awareness
where you know you're triggered you know
you're dissociated you know you're in an
emotional flashback but you don't want
to tell other people that because maybe
you're at work and you don't want to
talk about your complex PTSD with your
boss right so instead you might say
something like oh I got three hours of
sleep last night I'm super exhausted
sorry if I'm out of it but actually
you're not out of it maybe you got eight
hours of sleep last night right but you
are dissociating because you got
triggered by something right but you
feel like you can't disclose that so
instead you come up with another reason
that kind of fits the reaction you're
having but that isn't the truth and
again this is also unfortunately kind of
an Adaptive lie a lot of the time
unfortunately a lot of people do have to
not tell the full truth about their
mental health in order to keep their
employment and that sucks and that's a
massive problem with Society not with
you but again that's another reason why
those with complex PTSD unless they have
found a way to be completely
self-sufficient so not need any sort of
employer or not need to show up to any
particular commitments
um
is likely to lie about what's happening
is because they are having a 10 out of
10 reaction to a 3 out of 10 situation
and they need to find a way to account
for the discrepancy interpersonally
reason number nine why people with
complex PTSD might lie is almost kind of
the inverse of this but could be related
actually
um you lie because you don't want to
have to caretake the other person's
feelings around if you were to tell them
the truth and if I'm being totally
honest here that's 90 of the reason why
I for example lie about my chronic pain
I don't want to stress people out by
letting them know how bad it is for me
I'm used to the level of Badness I'm
used to dealing with extreme pain I'm
used to dealing with a lot of scenarios
that other people aren't used to and I
imagine if I were to explain to them
what I'm going through it would put
stress onto them and I don't want to now
have to deal with both my own pain my
own stress and having to care take
someone else's emotional experience
around learning about my stress if that
makes sense so people with complex PTSD
because they often don't know that they
can go to other people for care support
and nurturing they assume my job is to
be fine 100 of the time to not put my
problems on other people and if I have a
problem I not only have to learn how to
completely and totally deal with that
problem on my own I also have to learn
how to make other people feel better
about the fact that I have a problem and
when you're actively experiencing that
problem the last thing you want to do is
also worry about other people's
emotional reactions to it so what you're
probably going to do is tell a lie that
gets people to go away and not feel
worried about you so that you don't have
to explain the problem you're
experiencing to those people because
you're too busy experiencing it and if
you had not grown up in a way that was
extremely complex and caused all of
these problems for you again complex
PTSD is complex you might have a support
system who's familiar with the problems
that you go through and who shows up to
help you and who you don't have to
explain or caretake their emotions
around when you're struggling with
something but because complex PTSD is
complex chances are you didn't really
know that was an option you just learned
to hide every time you were struggling
or in pain and then you also learn to
not communicate it so you didn't have to
make other people feel better about it
because you didn't know it was an option
to communicate it and receive support
and Care in return
and that sucks and it's something that
you could learn to do differently as
your life goes on and now you're aware
of that that's just another really
common way in which people with complex
PTSD tend to lie is because they don't
want to have to manage their own
situation and other people's feelings
about their own situation which is what
they assume they are going to have to do
reason number 10 why people with complex
PTSD might lie it feels freaking nice to
feel normal sometimes
when you have a history of complex
trauma and you have a life of jumping
through weird Hoops to have the things
that other people consider Bearer
Necessities into normal part of life
like I don't know a few friends a
partner a place to live it feels nice to
just sometimes pretend that those things
come easy for you too
I used to have this habit of like
inventing jobs
the worst of my like lying if I were
going to some event where I knew that
the average person would have a very
like normal run-of-the-mill life I would
just like invent a profession and
pretend that I had like a very normal
nine to five job and that I had like
normal things and a normal way of living
when in reality I spent I spent my
entire 20s like traveling and working
odd high pressure jobs that uh would
like make me a bunch of money and then I
would have no work for a while and then
I would have these like chaotic
relationships and but but if you met me
at a barbecue you would meet Heidi the
freelance writer who mostly works for
small companies helping them with their
personal branding and on my off time I
spend time with my partner who I've been
with for two years I read quite a bit
but I mostly like fiction books like
Murder Mysteries and I don't really know
much about psychology or mental health
but I do have a friend who's going to
graduate school for it it just feels
nice to feel normal so sometimes
and I think that most people with
complex PTSD
have at some point or another
in bigger or smaller ways whether it's
inventing a mostly fake life at a
barbecue or just telling small white
lies to fit into a social situation
where you know you don't really belong
have that experience of just wanting to
lay down all of the chaos that is the
rest of your life for like a hot second
and feel normal
and the cool part is that
I talk about this in other videos but
the more you can work towards gaining
your own security gaining a secure
attachment style which is no small feat
I don't say that simply
the more you will find ways to share
yourself authentically without
overwhelming other people the more you
will find ways to seek support and Care
from people who can understand you
because you will know where to look you
will find communities like recovery
circles whatever it is where you'll find
all of a sudden my story Isn't So
abnormal right my background is not
different from these people's
backgrounds and I will put a ton of
links and resources in the description
of this video on where you can start
seeking out communities like that and
getting yourself surrounded by more
people who you feel like you don't have
to lie to but I just wanted to make this
video as kind of a I don't know
compassion commiseration session with
those who have histories of complex
trauma and who might beat themselves up
a lot for telling lies or for not
knowing what the truth is in the first
place right it is almost definitely not
your fault that you are lying frequently
I don't think anyone really really likes
to lie I think all of us at our core
really crave authentic relationships
where we're sharing who we really are
and actually letting people get to know
and love the real us but there's so much
so much in the way of that for most
survivors of complex PTSD or their types
of trauma right so I'm inviting you to
give yourself some compassion in this
regard go easy on yourself start to
unpack all of this slowly and look for
the safe places and look for the
different Pathways forward one at a time
you don't need to stop lying about
everything overnight you just need to
become more aware of which situations
you may not have noticed it's now
actually safe for you to tell the truth
in and I personally really hope you
start finding those because that is
where the hardcore healing work actually
happens all right that is all I have to
say for today on this topic as always I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and I will see you back
here again really soon
foreign
[Music]