hey guys I'm Heidi prev welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today we are talking
about boundaries and how to tell if
yours have become too rigid
now I want to be clear before we get
started that when I say the term too
rigid this does not mean that there are
objective types of boundaries that are
inherently too rigid or not rigid enough
boundaries need to be adjusted based on
the relationship that they pertain to so
two people could set the exact same
boundary with two different people in
their lives and for one person the
boundary could be absolutely perfect and
completely appropriate to the situation
whereas for another person the exact
same boundary could actually be way too
lenient or not at all appropriate to the
situation so as we go through this video
what I want you to keep in mind is that
these are things you need to check in
with yourself about
the appropriate boundary to set is
always the boundary that allows you to
stay the most present and alive and
engaged with your own life so boundaries
are not about keeping people or things
out predominantly they are about keeping
our full selves intact Within
so you know that your boundaries have
become too rigid when they are impeding
upon your ability to express yourself
authentically and show up in a genuine
way in the world the first sign that
this is happening for you is that your
boundaries are leading you to feel kind
of dead inside so I'm going to say this
again because I cannot emphasize it
enough the point of boundaries is not to
keep things out it is to Define which
limits we need to set in order to keep
ourselves feeling present vital and
relatively safe within a very kind of
common rookie mistake I see people
making when they start setting
boundaries for the first time is leaving
everything that excites them that
interests them and that they want out of
their life on the other side of their
boundaries so when we set a healthy
boundary that actually works for us it's
about conserving energy in one area so
that we can use it in an area that's
more important to us boundaries that are
too rigid cut you off from the risk of
spontaneously feeling things but healthy
boundaries increase your ability to stay
present and experience your emotions as
they spontaneously arrive so I'm going
to give you an example of this there was
once a situation where I was meant to go
see a friend who I had to drive out of
town in order to visit and I had two
trips planned with this friend one was I
was gonna go visit them this weekend and
then they were going to come down to my
city for another event that was
happening the next weekend the weekend
that I was meant to go visit them there
was an incredible snowstorm that hit the
highway in between where I was and where
they were and I knew I do not feel safe
driving in this weather I don't want to
get on that highway I don't want to risk
it it feels too intimidating to me to be
out in that storm
but my friend I could tell was really
hoping that I would make it that weekend
which was fair because we had plans that
we were both very genuinely excited for
but a part of me knew if I get on that
Highway
even if everything goes smoothly even if
I make it through the storm even if I
White Knuckle it the whole way there and
then arrive safe and sound I am going to
feel a sense of resentment because I
will know the whole time I don't want to
get in this car I don't want to drive
there I want to keep myself safe at home
and I'm a little bit annoyed with the
fact that the only reason I'm getting in
this car and going to see my friend is
because I know that they really want me
to come and I really thought about it
and I thought if I go and I bring that
resentment with me we're going to have a
really weird weekend I'm going to be a
bit annoyed the whole time I'm going to
tell myself this story they don't really
care about me they're not concerned
about my well-being and it's going to
really impact my ability to be present
with this friend so I made the decision
to not get in the car and go to my
friend's house and the next weekend when
they came down to my city once the storm
had cleared up we were able to reunite
and have a really wonderful couple of
days together because there was no
lingering tensions there is no
underlying resentments and so my
decision the weekend before or to
respect my own limitations and set a
boundary even though I knew that it was
not quite what my friend was hoping for
allowed us to stay in Connection in a
very authentic and genuine way because
the next time we saw each other there
was nothing under the surface that was
keeping us from actually being in the
moment with each other and this is
exactly what healthy boundaries are
supposed to help us do to get rid of the
things that would otherwise turn into a
lingering resentment simmering anger
that runs under the surface of a
relationship some sort of story we're
telling ourselves about the other person
or ourselves that gets in the way of us
being able to just sit with them and be
totally open to whatever emotions are
arising in the moment because we're not
preoccupying ourselves with unresolved
things from the past so this brings us
back to that point if your boundaries
are causing you to feel kind of dead
inside like there's no joy or excitement
or aliveness inside of your
relationships it's very probable that
your boundaries have become too rigid
boundaries can be sad they can be
difficult to set but they shouldn't make
us feel as though we have nowhere to
move and know where to go right
boundaries are supposed to be the things
that expand our ability to move freely
in the world without resentments which
brings us to sign number two that your
boundaries might be too rigid you are
constantly going back on your own
boundaries or failing to reinforce them
after you set them now why on Earth
would we consistently go back on a
boundary that we ourselves decided was
important to set probably because the
boundary that we set wasn't nuanced
enough so it included both parts of the
relationship that we do truly want to do
away with but also parts that we want to
keep so I think that this is a very
common Dynamic that happens for example
with couples who keep breaking up and
getting back together and breaking up
and getting back together it is this
idea of throwing the baby out with the
bath water when you set boundaries so
because you haven't taken the time to
really sit down be present with what is
and isn't working in your relationship
and then separate those things out so
it's clear you are assuming that if
anything goes wrong you need to throw
the entire relationship out or you have
to throw a very significant portion of
it out and if you are throwing out
what's good alongside with what's bad in
a relationship you're probably going to
find yourself repeatedly crossing your
own boundary deciding not to reinforce
your own boundary because you think that
to get the good back you have to also
welcome in the bad this often happens
when we don't want to face what it is
that we actually don't like about a
relationship or when we aren't really
aware of the fact that we can set real
nuanced boundaries or there could be
some fundamental part of the repair
process after we've had a rupture in our
relationship that we are consistently
missing out on so this is a bit
embarrassing but an example for my own
life is that I used to not really know
what it meant to be vulnerable I would
feel angry at someone and when I got
angry whether it was a close friend a
family member a partner I would simply
take a bunch of space and expect that
eventually that feeling of anger would
pass and then when it did I would go
back into the relationship as though
nothing had happened what was missing
from this process was me sitting with
that anger
learning where I had actually been hurt
in the interaction
bringing that part forward to the person
who had hurt me talking to them about it
and figuring out what we could do
differently next time so that when we
were in a similar situation we could
navigate it without unnecessary hurt
feelings and because I didn't know how
to do that I didn't know how to access
my own vulnerability I didn't know how
to put language to it and I definitely
did not know how to share that language
with another human being what I would
end up doing is taking space when I was
angry and then sometimes especially in
situations where there were reasons why
I needed to interact with that person on
a daily basis because let's say we work
together or live together I would end up
going back on my own boundary of not
wanting to be in touch for a certain
period of time because I didn't really
have a way around it and so I would go
back into the same harmful situation
never having set clear boundaries where
I needed to set them and find myself
continuously frustrated that I was right
back where I started so this leads me me
to point number three which I
essentially just gave you Olive so sign
number three that your boundaries are
too rigid is that you are more likely to
cut someone out altogether than you are
to explain to them directly what the
problem is and try to work with them to
resolve it so again this is one where
particularly if you grew up insecurely
attached you might not even be cognizant
of the fact that there is another way to
do things you may have always learned
you just stay in a relationship you
White Knuckle your way through the
things that you don't like or the things
you feel hurt by or the ways in which
you have to numb yourself or distort
your own Persona in order to stay in
close contact with the other person and
if you don't want to do any of that
anymore then you just exit the
relationship and it sounds so simple and
everyone tends to agree when you say
things like relationships require
communication relationships require
discomfort relationships require a lot
of work but many of us who grew up with
this unconscious programming that tells
us we either ignore the things we don't
like or we throw the entire relationship
out end up doing just that and operating
directly from that programming so it
might not even occur to us that we could
go up to someone and go hey here's
what's not working for me here's where I
felt hurt within something that you told
me here's what I would like to do to try
to resolve this what do you think about
working with me to see if we can
approach this situation differently the
next time it shows up boundaries are not
supposed to protect us from feeling
difficult or vulnerable emotions
they are only supposed to protect us
from genuine senseless harm
right so if there are things happening
inside of a relationship that involve
let's say one person constantly
projecting onto another in a way that
cannot get resolved because the problem
they have is really not with that person
it's with someone from their past but
it's easier to get mad at the person in
front of them that's the type of
situation where it's not really helping
anyone and if you are the person on the
receiving end of that it's going to be
helpful after a few tries to directly
resolve it to Simply set a boundary and
go okay I have to reevaluate what this
person's position should be in my life
if they are unwilling to take
responsibility for the ways in which
they are impacting me after I make that
explicitly clear to them and try to
resolve it directly with them if
possible then I have to look at where do
I draw a fence around this Behavior
where do I keep myself separate from it
so that I can continue to move through
the world with freedom and flexibility
but what boundaries are not there to do
is to protect you from having to feel
anything right you're going to have
difficult situations that come up even
in the most secure relationship you're
going to have ways that you piss each
other off you're going to have ways in
which your lives don't combine super
easily and you're going to have to work
together whether it's in a romantic
relationship a friendship any really
close connection to figure out which
compromises both of you are willing to
make
but if before even considering proposing
a compromise you move immediately to
throwing the entire relationship in the
garbage there is a very high chance that
your boundaries are too rigid and that
you may never have learned or really
like internalized even if you did learn
it that there are a lot of steps you can
take before throwing a relationship in
the garbage but they are definitely
risky vulnerable steps that you have to
be ready to protect yourself through and
this might involve undoing a lot of the
things you've internalized about what it
means to be a good or ideal partner or
friend or family member if you are
holding yourself up to these
expectations that don't make sense
relative to the relationship you're in
it's going to be really hard to set
boundaries appropriately not to go off
on too big of a tangent but I think it's
an important one a lot of the time I see
people who are let's say severely
insecurely attached date dating another
person who is severely insecurely
attached and they are trying to apply
the Norms that exist within a secure
relationship to their relationship and
then getting distressed when it doesn't
work out not taking into account the
fact that their relationship is not a
secure relationship ergo it is going to
have different norms and different
boundaries what do I mean by that I mean
there are kind of platitudes you hear
about things like Partners should be
able to meet each other's emotional
needs however if you are insecurely
attached let's say you are severely
anxiously attached and you have a lot of
emotional needs that you do not have any
ability or any understanding of how to
meet on your own like let's say
day-to-day emotional regulation skills
and you are expecting your partner to be
there for you and to fix the way you're
feeling every single time you feel upset
that might be an unreasonable
expectation patient to be placing on
your partner because the level of
emotional needs that you have is much
much higher than someone in a secure
relationship so you might need to figure
out how do I get support in other areas
so I'm not putting all of these
emotional needs that the average secure
person grew up learning to meet for
themselves on another person who is not
my parent or my caregiver and is really
not responsible for emotionally growing
me up right so how do I take on that
task for myself how do I find a
counselor a support system a group of
peers who I can turn to for quite a bit
of that when I'm feeling distressed and
emotionally disregulated versus how much
is my partner able and explicitly
willing to take on and there's certainly
an equivalent example we could find from
the avoidance side of things but the
point of all of this is just to make it
clear that boundaries need to be
relationship specific what works for one
relationship could be the completely and
totally wrong set of boundaries for
another alright tangent over sign number
four that your boundaries are too rigid
is that you most often set boundaries
when you are angry or upset and the main
purpose for your boundaries is that you
are trying to punish somebody else to
get them to change their behavior I
wasn't even sure if I was going to
include this on the list because at this
point you are not technically setting a
boundary now of course we don't want
people to treat us badly right but the
purpose of setting a boundary is not to
change somebody else's Behavior if we
want someone to change the way they're
behaving towards us we can ask them
directly hey I noticed that you don't
speak particularly kindly towards me or
I don't like it when you say things like
X Y or Z to me would you mind not saying
that to me anymore because I find it
really gets in the way of me being able
to feel close to you if I feel as though
you are speaking down to me and when you
say x y or Z I feel spoken down to I
feel kind of small and insignificant if
they say yes great then your
relationship changes if if they say no
then the boundary that you set as a
result is not to punish them and get
them to change it is to protect yourself
from being in a situation where there's
even a possibility that you are going to
encounter that behavior in them so if
you think I can't get through a
conversation without this person
speaking down to me it is your job as
your inner adult whose job it is to
protect your inner child to make sure
that in the future you have few to know
conversations with that person again a
boundary is about how you will protect
yourself not about how you are trying to
manipulate someone into protecting you
for you and I think that this type of
behavior is not uncommon among anyone
who is insecurely attached is this
pattern of kind of not saying anything
about something that makes you
uncomfortable in a relationship for a
long period of time until the resentment
grows and grows and grows and then doing
some sort of huge intense protest
Behavior so telling someone you want to
break up with them telling someone you
are moving out threatening to to do
something that will negatively impact
the other person and calling it a
boundary one more time for the cheap
seats it is not a boundary if the end
goal is getting someone else's Behavior
to change that is a manipulation even if
you have very good reason to be upset
with the other person right someone
could be truly unkind cruel directly to
my face and I still get the choice about
whether I'm going to set a boundary or
attempt to manipulate them I still have
a choice about my own Integrity in that
situation A boundary protects me a
manipulation puts both of us into the
drama triangle and perpetuates the cycle
of dysfunction we're telling ourselves
I'll only be okay if this other person
changes and that is a completely
external locus of control that robs us
of any real autonomy so it is definitely
not the kind of flexible and
self-responsible choice that allows us
to move more freely in the world if any
anything it just creates more anxiety
for us because we are now desperate for
someone to behave in a way that we have
no real control over and sign number
five that your boundaries have become
too rigid we have been hinting at this
throughout the entire video you are
extremely All or Nothing in
relationships so you have absolutely no
boundaries at all you are cruising down
the freeway with no stop signs anywhere
and then all of a sudden you throw your
car off the road and completely abandon
the highway altogether this is an
extraordinarily common Dynamic and
insecurely attached Dynamics in which
both people did not really learn what a
boundary is how to recognize where and
when they need to set them and instead
both parties learn you put up with
whatever you get and then when your
frustration level or your anger level or
the story that you've been creating in
your head about how you're a victim and
they're a villain gets to a certain
threshold you abandon the entire thing
altogether and start afresh with another
relationship that you go into with the
the same level of enmeshment so in that
same unboundary way that does not
protect you in any real way from the
parts of the relationship that do not
work for you so these are the signs to
watch out for that you might not be the
best at setting boundaries within your
relationship and that when you do you
set boundaries that are way too extreme
for the situation at hand but what we
are going to talk about next in a
follow-up video that is coming out later
this week is how to recognize where you
need to set boundaries how to check in
with yourself probably for the first
time and learn what it is that keeps you
present engaged flexible and fully
authentic within a relationship as well
as how can you go about setting those
boundaries once you realize where they
need to be so that you no longer need to
resort to these overly rigid overly
harsh boundaries that aren't really
helping you get the types of
relationships you want but for now that
is all I'm going to say okay as always I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again super soon
foreign