hey guys heidi preeb here today i wanted
to make a video that talks about
something that i think has been largely
unaddressed ironically on this channel
which is not just what it looks like to
be insecurely attached but what happens
when you become secure and when you
begin to actually heal the attachment
wounds that are currently holding you
back in relationship that you struggle
with interpersonally because i think
that a lot of the time when we think
about secure attachment we have this
almost idealized version of it where we
think that being secure or earning
security means that we will stop
struggling in relationships or that
things will magically get better for us
and i would love if that were the case
and i am still waiting sometimes in some
parts of my psyche for that to magically
happen but
the truth is that secure attachment does
not fix your problems it just means you
have better coping mechanisms as you
move through your problems so i wanted
to make a quick video talking about how
to have realistic expectations for the
attachment healing process by
acknowledging some things that will and
won't happen as you move towards an
insecure status and you start showing up
in different ways in your relationships
so i've structured this as kind of a
list of things that it does and doesn't
mean to heal your attachment style or to
earn security so thing number one that
earning security does not mean is that
everyone will suddenly care about your
feelings so i think that particularly if
you're coming more from the anxious
attachment side of the spectrum there
can be this assumption that once you
show up and learn to communicate more
vulnerably and openly and fairly you
will stop getting rejected and you will
have kind of smooth communication
forevermore but this is absolutely not
the way that it works in real life you
healing your attachment style and
showing up differently in the world does
not mean that the people around you will
necessarily also start showing up
differently right there are situations
yes where the way that we show up in
relationship is causing interpersonal
problems that might not be there if we
were to choose a different communication
style but you healing your attachment
style does not magically mean that
everyone around you is suddenly going to
start caring about and prioritizing you
in a different way just because you've
chosen to do that but what attachment
healing does mean is that you'll be able
to recognize the relationships in which
you're not able to get what you need out
of other people and you'll be able to
let those relationships go so you won't
feel that kind of frantic insatiable
desire to get everyone to see your
perspective or to agree with you or to
care about you you'll be able to
differentiate what your need is from
what someone else is able or willing to
give and you'll be able to prioritize
relationships with other people who are
emotionally available so step one is the
inner work but step two is the outer
work of making sure that your
environment matches the way you feel
inside and that the people in your life
are ready for the same types of
relationships that you're ready to have
and if the answer is they're not having
a secure base within yourself means
being able to let go of the people who
aren't able to meet you where you want
to be at in relationships and go seek
out relationships that are more aligned
with the level of authenticity and
intimacy that you want thing number two
that healing your attachment style does
not mean it does not mean that all of
your interpersonal problems are suddenly
going to disappear there are still going
to be people you clash with there are
still going to be triggers that come up
for you every now and then there are
still going to be situations that you
don't necessarily know how to navigate
and that you get wrong
but what it does mean to heal your
attachment style is that as you are
navigating your way through those
challenges through those differences
through those new situations you'll have
an inner secure base that you can
continuously return to
inside of yourself where you're able to
both validate your emotional experiences
and choose appropriate responses to the
challenges that you're facing so your
relationships are not suddenly going to
go swimmingly all of the time but having
that secure inner base means you can
stay relatively regulated even through
the difficult periods in relationships
even when things don't work out the way
you want them to even when you are not
getting what you want out of other
people you're able to stay calm and
centered in your own self-concept again
this doesn't mean you never feel sad it
doesn't mean you never feel angry you
still have that full emotional range
available to you but you don't feel
desperate to have any of those needs met
interpersonally because you have a
strong support system both within
yourself and in your community that you
can turn to when times are difficult and
that stability that security that
support allows you to choose your
responses which actually leads us to
point number three so the third thing
that will not change when you start
doing attachment healing work is you
will not cease to get dysregulated or
upset you will still have difficult
moments you will still have times where
you show up in a way that you're not
proud of interpersonally you are not
suddenly going to turn into this perfect
person who always says and does the
right thing and never feels embarrassed
or ashamed of the way that they acted
but it does mean that you won't let that
shame stop you from showing up being
honest about the mistakes that you made
and doing true repair work when we are
insecurely attached we tend to be
operating out of a shame-based
personality which means that when we
make mistakes instead of thinking i did
something wrong we think i am wrong who
i am is wrong and so if i own up to this
mistake in a truly authentic way other
people are going to see me for who i am
which is a bad unworthy person but when
we are not shame-based and when we're
operating from that space of inner
security we're able to separate our
actions from our identity so we can look
at something we did or something we said
in a heated moment and go that was not
fine that was not okay but that's not
who i am as a person so i can show up
authentically in the repair work around
this i can go to the person i've hurt i
can own up to what i did or said that
i'm not proud of and i can be strong
enough in my own self-concept to know
that i am okay and i am worthwhile even
if that person doesn't forgive me even
if they stay upset at me even if they
don't accept my apology knowing that we
can do things that hurt other people but
own up to that and still have
self-respect in the process of owning up
to that is what it means to have that
secure inner base we don't need the
other people to give us something when
we're apologizing to them because we
already feel centered in who we are so
we can actually show up with true
empathy for them and true presence even
if they're not ready to forgive us
number four thing that will not happen
when you start healing your attachment
style your life will not suddenly lack
drama or excitement okay and i have made
a whole separate video on this but a lot
of people fear that if they were to heal
their attachment style and get into a
secure relationship life would become
dull and this is not at all what happens
what happens when you become secure is
that you are finally in the driver's
seat of your own life and you get to
choose which types of excitement which
types of adventures which types of
opportunities you pursue as opposed to
constantly reacting to drama because you
feel out of control of your
physiological responses to other
people's emotions and let me tell you
the form of excitement that you choose
rather than the excitement that chooses
you when you are insecurely attached is
about a thousand times more fulfilling
more meaningful more filled with growth
opportunities than anything any sort of
excitement that happens when you are
insecurely attached and you are simply
responding to whatever makes you feel
temporarily okay about yourself in the
moment when you're secure you have a
base level of feeling okay about
yourself you feel that most of the time
okay so then any adrenaline any
excitement any joy you choose to bring
into your life you are truly choosing
and walking into and embracing
wholeheartedly and that feels about a
thousand times better than continuing on
the merry-go-round of dysfunction and
temporarily getting a hit of something
good in the process it's not even
comparable and the last thing that needs
to be distinguished between security and
non-security is that having a secure
attachment style does not mean your
relationships will always be easy you
will not always say or do the right
thing you will not always get along
naturally with every single person you
meet but it does mean that in the
relationships you form that have the
natural capacity to be happy and loving
and harmonious you will not be throwing
any unnecessary roadblocks in the way
okay so you still will have to go out
there and kiss a lot of frogs to find
your prince or whatever like less gender
normative iteration of that phrase we
can find but you will not be throwing
any obstacles in your own path that
wouldn't otherwise be there right other
people are always going to be other
people there's always going to be drama
in the world there's always going to be
other unhealthy people out there who
don't want to show up honestly and
authentically to relationships and you
cannot change that it does not matter
how secure you are it does not matter
what you do or how you show up there
will always be people you cannot control
situations you cannot control but having
secure attachment and a secure base
within yourself means that at the least
when you finally do happen into those
relationships that do feel relatively
easy relatively comfortable relatively
calm you can keep them that way
right you will not be unconsciously
throwing grenades into your own
relationships and knowing that you can
trust yourself to stick with what's
right and to give to it and receive from
it holistically and honestly is a really
freaking good feeling even if it's not
currently happening because i think a
really big thing that impedes upon our
self-esteem when we're insecurely
attached is knowing that even if the
conditions were right there's something
within us that we don't always feel in
control of that might cause the tides to
change at any moment but when you have
that secure inner base you can at least
rest assured that when secure healthy
harmonious relationships are available
to you and those are relationships that
you want to have you'll be able to rise
to the challenge right there will still
be challenges there will still be
problems but you won't be creating
problems that don't need to exist and
that is a really good feeling to have
about yourself it is worth doing a lot
of work to get there okay that is all i
have to say for today i just wanted to
do a quick reality check because i feel
like i have had so many incorrect
idealizations about what earning
security would mean and i see so many
other people also having those
idealizations and it just does not mean
your life is problem free it just means
you're able to deal with problems in a
mature and adaptive way that's pretty
much the whole thing right there
as always let me know in the comments
what your thoughts are which ah-ha
moments you're having as you move
through your attachment healing process
and also as always i love you guys i
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and i will see you back
here again really soon
[Music]
you