hey guys heidi preep here so the video
that i'm making today is kind of a
follow-up video to the best and worst
jobs for enfps video that i made a
couple weeks back i listed the number
one job as writer and i am definitely a
little bit biased there because i have
been doing writing on and off but for
the most part that has been my main
occupation in life so i've had five
books and probably upwards of a thousand
articles published i've also ghost
written hundreds of scripts social media
posts speeches and in a few cases parts
of books for thought leaders and
entrepreneurs and i also run a writing
instagram account which is currently
pretty inactive but for a while i was
posting there every day so this is all
just to establish kind of where i'm
coming from when i talk about all of
this stuff because i wanted to give some
tools for how i manage writing as an
enfp and some of the tips that i've
learned along the way so i have
definitely learned predominantly through
trial and error i don't have any formal
education in writing sometimes that
shows when my work gets into the hands
of an editor i'm like way too happy with
the m dashes and absolutely everything i
write
but i do think that every type
approaches creative expression through a
slightly different lens and obviously no
two enfps are going to be exactly the
same in their writing style no two enfps
are going to approach the craft in the
same way but i'm going to share a little
bit about what has just worked for me
personally and if it helps you out and
if there's anything in here that feels
useful for you then that's awesome some
of this is just general advice and other
parts of it we're going to talk about
your cognitive functions and if you
don't know what i mean when i say
cognitive functions i'm talking about
extroverted intuition introverted
feeling extraverted thinking and
introverted sensing we all use eight
cognitive functions but prefer four of
them and the four that the enfps prefer
i go over in depth in my enfp soul
bootcamp course which is a six-week
self-study program that you can check
out on my website at
www.heidiprev.com we tell kind of the
story of the enfp psyche as if it's the
movie inside out so all of those
different areas of processing are
personified and played out as characters
who talk about what it's like to be an
enfp and how to navigate the world more
authentically as the type you are rather
than trying to fit yourself into someone
else's mold so when it comes to writing
as an enfp i've narrowed it down to five
tips that i would give myself if i were
starting out all of those years ago in
order to save myself some time and start
accepting that the way i work is not the
way everybody else works and that's okay
and something really brilliant can come
out of that right i think that a lot of
enfps think like i have to be this very
disciplined very eloquent very
detail-oriented writer or else i'm not a
true writer right but and we will get
deep into this when we get into these
points i think that the things that set
you apart are actually the things that
are going to make you the most relatable
the most effective at communicating your
ideas the most interesting to your
audience so a lot of this piece is just
going to be about not abandoning
yourself in your writing right because
the voice that you have is the voice
that you should be communicating don't
try to erase who you are in your work in
order to please some standard that
doesn't come naturally to you but i'm
getting ahead of myself so i'm going to
start with tip number one for the enfp
writer which is start in the middle
start with the meat and potatoes and
then build the side dishes around it so
i've talked about this in past videos
but one of the best pieces of advice i
ever got as an enfp is when i was
writing the enfp survival guide in i
think was like 2016 i sent out a survey
asking enfps for the best pieces of
advice that they would want to give to
other enfps and someone wrote back
saying when you have a big challenge or
a big task start in the middle start
with the part that you're really excited
about invested in and then build the
structure of everything else around that
thing don't try to start at the
beginning and then work logically in a
sequential fashion until the end that
will just make you lose energy start
with the part that you're already fired
up about and then let everything else
fall into place around that and that is
the single best piece of advice in terms
of creative work that i think any enfp
could get and i cannot take credit for
it it was not my idea i don't even have
the real name i don't think of the
person who sent that in but i absolutely
structure my own writing in that
capacity all of the time so i start with
whatever idea is really interesting to
me whatever question is kind of gnawing
at my psyche that i really want to
answer or to explore through writing and
i write that down i write down the
paragraph that made me want to sit down
and write in the first place right and
then i look at that paragraph or that
chapter or whatever it is and go okay
what is missing here so if a person who
knew nothing about this topic or who
only knew a little bit about this topic
were arriving at this paragraph what
would they need explained to them in
order for them to understand it and
often that helps you build out the
beginning parts of the piece of writing
as well as the end parts so again you're
kind of building out from a singular
idea i kind of picture it as like
putting the structure of a house up
before you nail the walls in right if
you try to build the walls without the
structure in place it's not going to
make any sense and i think that for
enfps that's what it feels like to us
when we try to start a piece of creative
work at the natural beginning and then
work our way to the end it's like we're
constructing walls without a frame in
place
so for you what i want you to do is
build the frame of the most important
room first get that idea fleshed out
figure out what it is that you're really
trying to communicate and then let the
rest of the structure fall into place
around it the last thing that you should
be adding is the walls and the details
right the last thing that you should be
adding to your writing is the stuff that
you find kind of boring because by the
time you get to the end you'll just get
excited that you're that much closer to
completing the project and then it won't
feel as grueling to add in the things
that felt a little bit dull at the
beginning because you see the overall
project and you're so close to the end
so for me what this looks like in
practical terms is usually i will sit
down and kind of write out the parts i'm
most excited about and then i will take
that and extrapolate a structure for the
overall piece of writing from it so if
it's an article usually i will figure
out okay how do i bring the reader to
this paragraph in a way that makes sense
and that's engaging and how do i end it
in a way that kind of wraps things up
nicely if it's a book what i'll often do
is sit down and write the titles of
every chapter and then i'll go through
and write the subtitles of every chapter
within the chapter because it's about
figuring out what you want to
communicate if you can figure out what
needs to be communicated and the
structure for communicating that idea in
a logical sequential way it's going to
make the rest of it incredibly easy
because your brain is not running all
over the place trying to figure out what
do i include what do i not include and
then it's just about filling in the
blanks right
so sometimes i will break down let's say
a chapter into word count so i'll go
okay i'm writing a chapter on let's say
myers-briggs this actually is a real
example i'm currently working on a book
that required me to have a chapter about
myers-briggs just kind of giving an
overview of the system so i was like
okay i know i want this chapter to be
about 6 000 words so i want to have a
brief explanation of each type so i
wrote down each type istj estj istp
et cetera et cetera and then i went okay
i know that to get the person there they
first have to understand what the
dichotomies mean so i wrote i versus e n
versus s t versus f p versus j and then
i went okay i also know i want to give
people a more nuanced understanding of
the cognitive functions so i wrote down
s i s e f i fe all the cognitive
functions right and now i can go through
and dedicate how many words i want to
approximately write about each of these
topics so if i spend 2 000 words
explaining the cognitive functions then
i have less words to give to let's say
the dichotomies and that's okay i can
figure out the budget right actually
that's exactly what it is budgeting
words and because there's 16 types i'm
probably gonna have to keep the
descriptions relatively short because
that word count is going to add up
quickly so maybe i can only give 200
words per type and what that means is
that i have to find a formula for being
really concise in my type explanations
so what i'll do usually is take one of
the explanations and try to write out a
model for it so go okay what is the
first sentence going to be what is the
second sentence going to be what is the
third sentence going to be in terms of
theme and what it's communicating and
then i'll replicate that for each of the
types and this is actually a formula
that i learned in high school when i was
learning how to write an essay they said
one of the most useful things you can do
is before you write the essay write the
structure about the essay so what that
means is instead of writing your opening
line write this opening line is going to
communicate what my thesis is in a
provocative yet clear way this line is
going to be an example showing what i
mean this line is going to be research
that backs that up this line is going to
be about drawing it all together in a
meaningful way and explaining what comes
next that isn't necessarily how you
should actually do an opening paragraph
of an essay i was riffing a little bit
there but that idea of planning what
you're going to write and what the
structure of what you're going to write
is before you sit down to write it can
be incredibly helpful if you need to
write something that's very structured
so tip number one is the number one
thing that i focus on when i sit down to
write something new figure out the most
important thing that needs to be
communicated and then build a clear
structure around it and obviously you
can give yourself leniency and
flexibility as you get into the actual
writing in each of those cases but from
the get-go it just kind of calms our
minds down a little bit and we'll talk
about this again later in the video when
we know where we're supposed to be going
as opposed to just sitting down and
writing and going okay i'll just see
what happens along the way right that's
going to take us down a lot of rabbit
holes which can be useful sometimes but
if you're trying to write something
specific that's not the best strategy
but again i'm getting ahead of myself a
little bit in this video okay tip number
two for the enfp writer but this is
really the advice i would give to
absolutely anyone who's interested in
getting into writing have something to
say
this sounds like it should be obvious
but i really think it's not i think a
lot of people think of writing as kind
of a craft and it is there is definitely
absolutely a craft to writing the way
that there is a craft to any form of
artwork but my personal die-hard belief
about writing is that your writing is as
interesting as the idea that you're
communicating if you have something
really hard-hitting powerful something
that's capable of changing the way
people look at something to say if you
can clearly communicate what that idea
is you are a good writer but that's also
not as simple as it sounds right like
you can have a good idea but if you
communicate it in a very dry way or a
way that kind of doesn't make people
feel something about it you haven't
communicated it clearly enough because
if it really is a good idea and you
communicate it well people will feel
something about it right now i'm doing
the any thing in my brain where i'm like
arguing with myself where i'm like what
about boring scientific papers where
they communicate things clearly but
they're still really boring
i don't know jury's out on that but if
you're trying to write an academic paper
this is not the video for you this is
the video for you if you're trying to
write something that has a little bit
more of your personality in it but
anyway bringing it back to my personal
philosophy which is anytime i am stuck
anytime i am facing writer's block
anytime i'm feeling creatively
challenged i ask myself what is the
truest thing that i can say about this
topic just write that down it doesn't
have to be pretty it doesn't have to be
eloquent just write down the truest
thing you know how to say about the
thing that you're trying to communicate
and then write the next truest thing and
then figure out what pieces of
information are missing in order for
people to understand those things you
just said and keep building from there
often when i'm stuck with a piece of
writing i'm not stuck because i can't
think creatively i'm stuck because i
can't think truthfully so maybe i'm
trying to make a point that as i'm
making it i'm realizing oh i'm kind of
deluding myself here or i actually don't
know as much about this as i thought i
did and it takes a lot of humility to be
able to recognize that right sometimes
in the middle of a piece of writing i
have to put it down and be like oh i
actually don't know enough to write this
yet so i have to go learn more i have to
understand in a more deep way i have to
integrate what i've experienced as well
as what i've cognitively compiled
through researching this topic and i
have to find a way to bring those
together but if it's feeling difficult
it's probably because i don't have that
kind of core truth about it yet that i'm
ready to share and that is a difficult
place to be in i think that
especially in today's day and age when
we are constantly trying to like pump
out content and create as much as we can
there is not a lot of people really
talking about the value of slowing down
and only creating when you actually have
something really meaningful to share but
i am a die hard believer truly die hard
believer that you cannot be a good
creative person if you do not know how
to stop when you don't have a truth to
share does that make sense like if you
are creating despite the fact that you
know you don't know enough about the
thing you're trying to share you're
being a dishonest creator and dishonest
creativity is great for some things
selling cars in commercials but it's not
great for producing really profound
impactful life altering pieces of
writing so this kind of has turned into
a different point that i was not
intending to make but i think that a
really important part of writing is
knowing when not to write right like
there was multiple years of my own life
not too recently where i could not write
anything at all like truly nothing i
could not write an article i could not
write an instagram post i just did not
have something in me that was kind of
fully cooked enough to actually deliver
to the world and it is actually the best
thing you can do i believe during those
periods if you're able to to just stop
writing stop creating give your brain
room to breathe process what you're
learning process what you're going
through allow yourself to have creative
dry spells i promise you it will make
you a better creative in the end so my
kind of bar lately is if i would not
absolutely yell this to try to get
through to someone then it probably
doesn't necessarily need to be written
and communicated and that's not to say
that every line that you write in any
piece of writing is going to be
something that you want to show from the
rooftops but the core of your piece of
writing should be something that you
really want to get out into the world
that you think is completely vital that
the world knows and that you would love
for everyone to understand if your
writing does not have that at the heart
of it it will not be good writing it
just won't because there is going to be
no heart in it there's going to be no
spirit to it and the audience is going
to be able to feel that the reader is
not going to be able to connect with
something if you are not connected to it
as the writer so do yourself the service
of yes practice your craft i think there
is lots to be said for writing when
you're not super inspired to get in the
habit of writing but don't beat yourself
up is what i'm saying if you can't
produce brilliant pieces of writing on
command or consistently right that's
actually a very normal part of the
creative process a really good um piece
of work to check out if you haven't
already read it is big magic by
elizabeth gilbert i think i talked about
it in another video i put off reading
this book for many years because i
didn't really love eat pray love so i
wasn't sure i liked elizabeth gilbert
and then i started following her on
instagram was like oh my god i love
elizabeth gilbert like everything she
says here speaks to me so i bought big
magic and it's such a good book on
living a creative life and how to kind
of manage your energy around your
creative output and how to make sure
that you are living enough to actually
have things to say and i firmly believe
elizabeth gilbert is an enfp the way
that she talks about the world is just
so an enfi to me so this all kind of
ropes back to that henry david thoreau
quote how vain it is to sit down and
write when you have not stood up to live
right that is my guiding philosophy with
writing guiding philosophy with creative
work in general unless you are
contracted to write every single day
because that's your job which to be fair
it has been for me at some point so i
understand that struggle i really
believe that your writing should always
be
significantly
less than the experiences that you're
having around that writing if that makes
sense like your writing should come from
a place of having a new deep profound
way of looking at life in the world that
you are dying to express and communicate
that is where good writing comes from so
if you feel like there is no good
writing left in you that's fine maybe
you've just said all you have to say for
now right maybe you need five more years
of experience before you have something
to write about again go out into the
world get that experience and wait until
you are bursting to share it that is
when your really good work is going to
come right i'm not saying that you
always have to do work from that space
but if we're talking about the kind of
life-altering show-stopping pieces of
work that have come out of enfps in the
world i truly believe that's where it
comes from from having lived in a giant
humongous completely unconventional way
and then sitting down to share that all
right tip number three and we are going
to ground ourselves a little bit here
i'm gonna step down off my soapbox it's
just about how to structure the time
that you give yourself to write so i
firmly believe that for enfps we're
going to do our best work when we have a
little bit less time than we need now
this is not a new principle this is not
a principle i invented and it's also not
a principle that is considered exclusive
to enfps i think that most perceivers
kind of operate this way right when we
are given the time to go run and explore
and play with ideas endlessly we will
truly do that endlessly for example
right now i have an essay due in a week
and a half and for a month and a half
i've been thinking about this essay and
kind of passively reading things that
are related to the essay i'm going to
want to write but i keep getting
distracted and going down rabbit holes
and just kind of playing my way around
this theory because i have time to right
so i haven't gotten anything concrete
written yet because the time pressure is
not on yet now here's why time pressure
works for us i think that a lot of p's
kind of think it's like a magic trick
like suddenly when you don't have enough
time now you can do it it's not magic
it's just how our brains are naturally
wired right we prefer to be in
information gathering mode being a
perceiver means that you prefer the
stage of any project where you are just
passively taking in new information
gathering and gathering and gathering
new thoughts and placing them all into
the kind of greater scheme of what you
know we will do that for as much time as
we have to do that because it's our
natural tendency and the way that we
naturally like to operate so i'm going
to give you an example by likening our
extroverted intuition which is our
dominant cognitive function as enfps
with sc which is the dominant cognitive
function of esfps and estps so if you
take an estp and you tell them go play
around in the forest all day and you
unleash them in this national park they
are going to go exploring they're going
to kind of figure out the lay of the
land and they're probably going to go
down a whole bunch of different paths
and explore a whole bunch of different
areas based on what looks interesting to
them in the moment right that is what
dominant extroverted perceiving
functions like to do is just get the lay
of the land and figure out what they're
dealing with and it's really fun to
explore extroverted intuition so our
dominant cognitive functions as enfps is
the same way in the world of ideas and
theories and constructs so
if i am writing an essay and i tell my
brain it's time to go play in the world
of ideas go read some stuff related to
this topic and just go explore my brain
is going to go down a million different
routes it's going to get lost sometimes
it's gonna find its way back it's gonna
get the lay of the land intellectually
now it's important to note that you are
sending your brain in with a very
specific goal when you're doing that
right and that goal is important getting
the lay of the land matters but if you
change the goal you change the outcome
so let's say we take that estp right and
tell them your goal is not to just
explore this park it's to summit this
one particular mountain you have five
hours to do it now you know they're not
going down different side routes they're
not exploring widely they're just
looking at the summit figuring out what
is the route i need to take to get there
and they're following that route to
accomplish the goal the same thing
happens for us intellectually as any
dominant types when we set a specific
goal within a specific time frame our
brain naturally goes here's where i have
to get to what route is going to take me
there and it naturally starts mapping
out the way that we have to go in order
to arrive at the summit which is that
piece of writing right so it looks at
okay i need to make this point very
clearly which studies do i need okay
where do i find those studies okay what
information am i missing where can i get
that it forces our brain into a kind of
structure that if we are left to our own
devices we won't naturally force
ourselves into because our brain likes
to play around and just get the lay of
the land and both parts of that process
are incredibly important i think that to
live a creative life as an extroverted
intuitive dominant type you have to be
constantly letting your mind when it's
just in your spare time float around and
read different books and try on
different theories and explore different
ways of living that is you getting the
lay of the land so that when you are
ready to sit down and produce a piece of
creative work and you have a time crunch
to already have that kind of mental
layout set up for when you sit down to
do the creative work so this is all to
say having a time crunch basically
forces your extroverted thinking online
it forces you to figure out how do i get
from here to there and you will
naturally start seeing what you don't
know yet and now need to find out your
brain will not naturally go in that
direction until you have a reason for it
to so try to give yourself deadlines
that give you a little bit less time
than you think you need that is how
you're going to shine so sometimes i set
false deadlines for myself or sometimes
i kind of force myself into doing a
deadline by like making myself
accountable to the person who i know i
have to hand it into and telling them
i'm going to get it done on this day so
that i force myself to kind of feel that
time pressure before it's incredibly
important that i actually hand it in and
that doesn't mean that you should
disrespect the false deadline respect
the false deadline it's a means of
getting you to do the stuff you want to
do in an actual timely fashion as
opposed to allowing your brain to
continue to endlessly gather information
which is what it is naturally inclined
to do as an enfp okay tip number four is
also a little bit more on the practical
side of things and this is be very
cautious as an enfp about your tendency
to overexplain theory and under produce
concrete examples so i think that a lot
of enfps myself included often go into
things thinking i will just explain the
kind of higher level concept multiple
different times in multiple different
ways and people will catch on to it and
we don't realize that even us as
intuitives actually need concrete
examples in order to extrapolate those
principles from when we're consuming
information so if i lost you there let
me give you an example if i read a
theory about how the enneagram works
right so i read kind of the context of
the enneagram and people talking about
how it disconnects you from your essence
and there are all these different types
and these are the kind of spiritual
problems they're up against i am going
to get this kind of archetype in my
brain but it's not going to be as
powerful as it would be if you explained
that archetype and then gave me three
different examples of what a type 9
looks like three different examples of
what a type 2 looks like in different
situations my brain is now naturally
going to start connecting the dots
between those examples and going okay so
these three enneagram twos let's say
have these things in common but not
these things in common which means i can
extrapolate that the thing that is
consistent between those three enneagram
twos is getting me closer to the essence
of what it means to be an enneagram too
that is how our brain likes to come to
solutions as in any dominant type but we
forget that we have to give that same
practicality back to people when we are
explaining these higher level principles
that we've extrapolated from examples in
our own life so we naturally watch the
world figure out which patterns we see
within different things that are
happening in real life in our actual
experience of being alive and we will
extrapolate the theory from there now to
explain it back to people we have to
give them the same ability to
extrapolate and to ground what we're
saying in reality so as an enfp our
tendency can be to just be so proud of
our theories and so proud of what we've
come up with that we just want to
explain the theory but we have to be
very conscious of that so my kind of
rule of thumb is give the theory give
two or three examples depending on what
piece of writing you're doing and how
many examples feel appropriate and
interesting and then if it makes sense
to connect it back to the theory but i
think that a lot of the time we're
trying to do too much work almost when
what we need to do is present the facts
and let our readers come to their own
conclusions about the theory and we will
be obviously leading them in this
process to the theory that we're trying
to explain but a really good writer
doesn't tell the audience what to think
or feel a really good writer leads the
audience to the natural conclusion that
they're trying to convey it lets the
reader feel like they got there
themselves does that make sense so allow
the reader to go through the process you
went through in figuring this thing out
show them different examples let them
form the pattern on their own and then
when they get to the end of your piece
of writing where you explain the pattern
a little bit more overtly they're going
to feel so proud of themselves for
having gotten there already so to do
this really well what you want to do is
think about who your reader is and try
to give some examples that they could
relate to so writing about personality
theory is going to cater to a different
audience than say writing about space
exploration you have to think about who
you're writing for and what kind of
examples they would need in order to
connect with the material and it's very
helpful that you are highly aware
probably of mbti and the different
personality types people have and so you
can cater your approach specifically to
different types based on which types you
think might be consuming your reading
now this does not mean lose your
authenticity or lose your voice we're
gonna get to that in the last point but
what it means is that the very fact that
you're aware of type theory means you
have a heightened ability to perspective
shift you have the ability to step into
other people's shoes and kind of think
to yourself what would this person need
to understand about what i'm saying that
maybe i take for granted that i already
understand because of the way my
cognitive processes work and how can i
include that in a way that feels
accessible to people who think very
differently than me and if you want to
take this one step further you can also
look at which biases your audience might
have which is kind of what type is right
it's really an examination of which
biases and blind spots we're holding but
you can bake that into your writing you
can kind of lead someone naturally from
a problem they're having so grounding it
in the concrete into a blind spot they
have you can explain the theory that
helps them to see and understand that
blind spot and then back into the
practical world of okay what do we do
about that and a lot of the time in
let's say psychology writing that's a
very useful skill being able to help
people connect how their real world
experiences are translating into slash
connecting to specific theories and then
how they can show up in the real world
in a different way with this new
understanding of theoretical knowledge
so do not discount the fact that the
knowledge base you have about type gives
you the ability to consciously and
intentionally structure your writing in
such a way that you can cover many
different types of blind spots depending
upon who your reader is and that leads
me to tip number five now that i have
told you all about how to cater to
people who are unlike you i want to
remind you not to lose your voice in the
process of writing right so i think that
what is so special about enfps is that
we really do perceive the world in kind
of a different way than a lot of people
our type is not that common and that has
humongous drawbacks but it also has
really humongous benefits when it comes
to creativity because we are able to get
deeply in touch with that introverted
feeling in a way that a lot of people
are not capable of doing consider the
fact that having introverted feeling as
your second cognitive function means
that you are actually kind of in the
best position to observe it so people
who have introverted feeling is their
first cognitive function infps and isfps
most of the time they are absolutely
brilliant creatives but what they are
doing is kind of purely expressing the
emotion whereas when it is your second
cognitive function as it is for enfps
and esfps you're able to observe your
emotional experience from a bit of a
distance and analyze it and that is a
very unique skill that's one that not a
lot of people have and not a lot of
people capitalize on which means we have
this kind of unique vantage point that
we can share with the world and that is
very useful to people so i see a lot of
enfps thinking that because maybe the
type of sharing that they want to do the
type of creating that feels authentic to
them is not the way that they see other
people creating they have to change
their creative style in order to suit
the world but
what you are actually doing is taking
away from yourself the thing that would
make you unique as a creative and that
is your competitive advantage so i see
sometimes enfps wanting to train
themselves to kind of have this almost
unnaturally eloquent and kind of
measured creative voice when what is
brilliant about enfps and what we can
uniquely bring to so many creative
endeavors is the fact that we are so
gritty right like we are both grounded
in reality and creative and passionate
and inventive and when you juxtapose
those two things you get a really kind
of funny engaging down-to-earth way of
explaining complex topics do not train
that out of yourself
do not do it i promise you if you are an
enfp if you lead with extroverted
intuition and follow it up with
introverted feeling that specific
ability to juxtapose what's real with
what's theoretical in a way that is
funny and engaging and light-hearted in
one moment and then profoundly
emotionally jarring in the next you will
be absolutely fulfilling your creative
destiny because that is what you
naturally shine at
if it feels like you are struggling so
much to fit a certain creative mold
consider throwing out that creative mold
truly consider throwing it out for
example i will write produce film almost
nothing that i do not have complete and
total 100 creative autonomy over why
because when i'm limited by the confines
of what a company or a website or
whatever it is needs me to stay within i
cannot express the thing that i need to
express to the world in the exact way
that i'm capable of expressing it and so
i will be cheapening my work and it's
okay sometimes to cheapen your work if
what you want is to just make money and
you're not particularly concerned with
sharing your vision but if your goal is
a creative is to share what you believe
to be true about the world consider how
you can find as much creative autonomy
over your projects as humanly possible
and that might mean giving up money
opportunities whatever it is you have to
decide how much your integrity matters
to you versus how much opportunity
matters to you and i'm not saying that
you will never have to compromise in
those areas you will and you will just
have to be aware of which compromises
you're making and how you can keep
yourself grounded throughout those
compromises but i truly think from the
bottom of my heart the biggest mistake
you can make as an enfp writer is to
lose your voice by trying to sound like
someone who is more palatable right i
feel like i can think off the top of my
head of various enfp writers who have
gotten slammed continuously for swearing
for being almost too real too raw in
their writing but why are we hearing
about those criticisms because those
people first got famous because they
were so unabashed in the way that they
shared their voice the ones who are out
there trying to adapt themselves to what
everyone else wants them to be are the
ones who are not getting anywhere
because they don't have a competitive
edge your passion your grittiness your
refusal to be anyone other than yourself
is what makes you a good writer if you
can hone that skill to continuously
improve in a way that still makes you
feel like you are more and more and more
yourself and more and more and more
clearly able to express yourself honing
your skill does not have to be at odds
with expressing yourself in a very
authentic way your writing should always
be geared in the direction of how do i
more clearly more concisely more
impactfully communicate what i want to
say from the absolute heart of myself it
should not be about how do i tone myself
down to get more mass appeal will you
have to do this sometimes for exposure
sure again that's a compromise you're
sometimes going to have to make but this
should not be the heart of your work
this should not be the consistent way
that you produce work the work that you
are going to build your empire of
writing off of is going to be the work
that is the most honest to you
prioritize that hone that above
everything else and that is the single
most important thing i think you will
ever do in your career as an enfp writer
i think that's all i have to say for
today on this topic if you have
questions i know i went a little bit
theoretical and not too grounded in this
video so if you have anything specific
you were hoping to see answered that i
didn't answer i'm totally down to do a
follow-up video to this because i feel
very passionate about this topic like i
said most of my work in my life has been
in the field of writing and i have a
large amount of opinions about the field
of writing as well as about enfps so i'm
always happy to keep going with the
topic as always i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourselves and i
will see you back here again really soon
[Music]