hey guys heidi preeb here i am back in
my apartment in toronto after spending
the summer in europe and it is cold here
i had to put on a sweater and i didn't
love that for me i am the worst canadian
ever in that i hate the cold weather
like as soon as i'm not actively
sweating i think it's way too cold for
me and i feel the need to flee from the
country so we'll see how many more
videos i have in this apartment but
while we are here welcome back i'm also
going through this week that i go
through like every two years where i
decide i'm gonna dye my hair a nice
shade of deep chestnut brown and then it
goes black for like a week and
completely washes me out so welcome to
that week and i think that is all of the
updates i have about my physical
environment so without going off on any
more tangents let's talk about today's
video so the last couple of enfp videos
that i released were on slightly heavy
topics we talked about depression we
talked about breakups and those are very
important things to think about and
focus on how we're moving through
but i wanted to do something today that
felt a little bit lighter and maybe a
little bit more celebratory i wanted to
talk about some of the things that enfps
are not commonly praised for because in
my opinion a lot of the positive stuff
that is out there about enfps is very
very surface level like any online
article will tell you that we are
optimistic and friendly and bubbly and a
lot of fun to be around but i really
think that those traits barely scratch
the surface of what it is that the enfp
has to offer the world and i want to
take this video as an opportunity to
explore some of the more nuanced aspects
of the enfp psyche that don't often get
the credit that they deserve the thing
about typology is that your personality
is always greater than the sum of all of
its parts right so you might share
cognitive functions with another type
esfps share the same decision-making
axis as us and entps share the same
perceptive axis as us but the way that
our cognitive functions combine to form
the whole of who we are gives us a very
specific set of skills and by the way if
you don't know what i'm talking about
when i say cognitive functions i'm
talking about the areas of your mind
that you use as an enfp to process
information make decisions check in with
yourself analyze and adapt to your
environment and if you want to learn
more about what those functions are and
how you use them i do run a six week
enfp soul bootcamp course on my website
www.heidipreeb.com and in the course i
act out your cognitive functions as if
they are little characters in a play and
you watch them move through a variety of
situations that you might encounter in
life and we talk about how to use your
functions more effectively to get you
more of whatever you want in life
whether that's financial success
healthier relationships more freedom
more security more autonomy my goal is
always to help you use the tools that
you have to become more you and while
we're here we are going to talk about
what some of those tools and gifts are
gift number one is something that i
think a lot of enfps actually have
looked at as a weakness their entire
life and i want to challenge us
collectively to reframe it so gift
number one is the ability to deal with
uncertainty so a lot of enfps myself
included grew up constantly being told
that they would never succeed in the
world if they didn't learn to become a
lot more organized to finish everything
they started to plan more effectively to
follow a plan more effectively and i
think that we could never have predicted
just how drastically the world would
change in the last 15 to 20 years the
invention of the internet and the way
that it has shaped the global workforce
has actually made it easier than ever
for any dominant types to survive and to
thrive in this workforce where you no
longer stay in a company for 50 years
right you're now expected to try out a
lot of different things to be on the
leading edge of new technologies to be
constantly theorizing about and trying
to figure out what's going to happen
next and what skills are going to be
valuable in 5 to 10 years and dealing
with that level of global uncertainty
and unpredictability is incredibly
stressful for so many people right we
take for granted as any doms that a lot
of that is really exciting to us and
that's not to say that it's not without
its stresses but we are not the types
who feel most comfortable planning out
the next 50 years of our lives and then
following that plan step by step by step
and getting panicked if anything goes
off course we like having 10 different
potential plans for the next five years
of our lives and just seeing which one
makes the most sense as we go along and
that's a skill that used to not be
incredibly valuable but at this exact
point in history it is monstrously
valuable the people who can adapt and
switch course and handle uncertainty are
actually the ones who are capable of
thriving in the workforce that we
actually have and even taking this
outside of the realm of the professional
i think that a lot of enfps are also
really good at dealing with emotional
uncertainty and again in order to
harness this gift we have to stop
beating ourselves up for it i see a lot
of enfps getting really down on
themselves for not always knowing
exactly how they feel feeling like they
should be as certain and as settled as
other people at certain points in their
lives but there's this incredible gift
involved in allowing ourselves to leave
things open-ended and figure out how we
feel as we go making sure that we are
being authentic in every moment of that
that other people really struggle with
but enfps naturally excel at we're
really naturally skilled at letting
there be room for uncertainty and doubt
and navigating that with interest and
presence and a sense of curiosity and a
lot of us don't realize how difficult
that is for other types you don't have
to hide the fact that you didn't get to
where you got to the way everyone else
did you got there in your own way and
learning that way and blazing that trail
can be incredibly important for all the
people watching gift number two is our
ability to observe the mind and its
mechanisms so i actually think that this
is one that i am surprised to find enfps
are not praised more often for and i
actually think it might be a product of
a lot of mistypes or something like that
that enfps are not given this as one of
their kind of most compelling and useful
qualities because a healthy enfp is one
of the single most mindful and
self-aware individuals you will ever
meet and that's not just me blowing
smoke up our asses like this is a direct
product of how our mind works right so
leading with extroverted intuition means
we're constantly noticing patterns and
then supporting that extroverted
intuition with introverted feeling means
that we're always observing our own mind
and how it works so when you put those
two things together you get someone who
is incredibly adept at noticing patterns
related to how the mind works and
there's this very natural sense of
mindfulness that comes from that and we
don't talk a lot about the mindful
nature of any doms enfps in particular
but i think that a lot of the absolute
most brilliant psychologists mindfulness
instructors authors people who study the
mind and how we operate are probably
enfps or types that are pretty
cognitively close to it because this is
a very natural extension of the way that
our mind naturally operates and the more
that we choose to engage healthily with
this gift and to use our understanding
of the human mind to ameliorate our own
lives and the lives of other people
rather than manipulate our own lives or
the lives of other people the more this
gift also just really radiates outward
because to a lot of people that feels
really difficult we take for granted
that we tend to understand why we do the
things we do and we have the capacity to
deeply dissect that right other people
need a lot of help getting there and
it's pretty cool that we can generally
kind of do that for ourselves just by
virtue of how our mind works gift number
three is again one that i think a lot of
enfps have felt almost burdened by in
their lives but that i think is in
astonishingly
needed trait which is questioning
convention so i think that every young
enfp knows the feeling of just being
told over and over again by a frustrated
adult like that's just the way it is or
because i said so um because they are
constantly and frequently
needing explanations for why things are
done the way they are right so when you
have extroverted intuition you see about
a million different routes forward at
any point in time and it can be
confusing when people are insisting on
doing one specific course of action and
you don't really understand why now
early on in life this can get
frustrating when you're expected to kind
of sit down shut up and follow the rules
but later on in life this tendency to
relentlessly and endlessly question
convention and authority can lead to
some of the most brilliant creative
insights in any field that you choose
right the world was designed to have
both upholders so people who are really
good at keeping things running the way
they are and also disruptors so people
who question the way things are and try
to figure out a different route forward
and your mind is naturally wired to be a
bit of a disrupter and that is such a
good thing okay it means that you might
deal with more pushback than the average
person that you might feel like you
don't quite fit in the way other people
fit in at certain points in your life
but ultimately this ability to see the
bigger picture to conceptualize of
different ways that things could be done
and to fight for those ways and advocate
for better ways forward those are the
things that actually make change in the
world right and if you choose to honor
that this is the way that you think it
can be invaluable in any workplace in
any relationship to the world at large
truly like disruptive and creative ideas
are really not a dime a dozen right not
a lot of people are thinking truly
critically and outside of the box in the
way that any doms naturally do trust
your creative thoughts trust your
creative vision and trust that the world
needs it because it does and again you
may not fully grasp just how rare the
way you think is gift number four is one
that's going to take a little bit of
explaining but that i think is actually
very very important i wasn't sure
exactly what to call it but what i
landed on is the term spiritual
sensitivity and i'm going to explain
what that means so basically i think
that a lot of enfps really struggle in
their lives with feeling like they can't
do anything that their heart is not 100
in right and again a lot of us have been
told that that's a negative trait that
we need to just buck up and get her done
and barrel through and life isn't
supposed to feel good all the time and
yeah that's true life is always going to
be full of challenges and there's always
going to be difficulty along any path we
choose but because enfps are so tuned in
to that introverted feeling and that
part of themselves that knows on a very
deep level what they feel aligned with
in life and what they don't it can feel
almost impossible to do anything in life
that we do not feel like we are supposed
to be doing that it does not feel like
we have the natural energy for that we
don't wake up wanting to jump out of bed
in the morning and get working on and a
lot of people would see that as a
negative thing right but
i think and i choose to see it as a
trait that actually keeps us very very
centered if we choose to listen to it so
having a sense of intuition that is that
loud and that pervasive and that yells
at us it doesn't whisper to us right if
we're doing something that makes us feel
bad and we feel like we physically
cannot continue
it can serve as a really really good
barometer of what we're doing wrong in
life a lot of people just kind of
blindly follow the path that they've set
out for themselves and don't ever check
in with themselves until they end up
somewhere where they completely never
intended to end up or where they're
super unhappy but they don't know why or
they've made choices that they're not
proud of but they don't know what led
them there and the fact that enfps at
all times are very tuned in to how we
feel about what we're doing and whether
we think what we're doing is right or
wrong good or bad going to be
expansive or constrictive for us in the
process
actually just means we have a very
sensitive barometer to the direction
that our life is heading in for years of
my life i wished that i could just suck
it up and get the work that i had
decided to do done and the fact that i
couldn't and that it felt like soul
murder for me to work on things that i
didn't care about is ultimately what led
me into a field that i was so crazy
passionate about right and that did make
me want to jump out of bed every morning
and i'm glad now in retrospect that i
could not bear the discomfort of doing
something that i hated and the people
who can easily tune that inner voice
that inner wisdom that inner knowing out
and just force themselves to do what
they don't really want to do are often
the people who end up very stuck and
when we try to tune out that inner voice
we end up stuck too the difference is
that it's usually available to us we can
usually hear it we usually know when our
body is saying no to something we need
to feel resistance towards the things
that are wrong for us in order to find
the things that are right for us and the
fact that you were tuned into that is an
incredible gift and if you can learn to
see that sensitivity as a strength as
something that is giving you an
opportunity to get closer and closer and
closer to the life that you will feel
most energized by living and that will
make you feel the most you the most
awake the most alive the most inspired
if you can understand that sensitivity
is the gift that brings you closer to
that you will never again wish yourself
to be less sensitive gift number five is
one that i just love so much in all fi
types really i can't say that this is
exclusive to enfps but we definitely
have like our own flavor of it and i
call it messy empathy so there are lots
of different types of empathy obviously
and i think there is this gift to
extroverted feeling which is the
dominant cognitive function of enfjs and
esfjs it's organized empathy like it's
good at meeting you where you're at
understanding where you want to go and
then helping you organize yourself in
that direction but there is this other
type of empathy that is equally as
important that introverted feeling is
astounding at which is being able to sit
down with someone in the middle of their
darkest messiest most confusing moments
in life and get to understand the
landscape of that person's mind and
empathize with it without needing or
trying to change it
right so being able to meet people where
they are
even if they're somewhere that is very
shameful that is very messy that is very
confusing for them to navigate and going
i've been here too you know i have
traveled through these lands in my own
mind i have seen and acknowledged in
myself
all of this darkness that you are now
encountering in yourself and because i
didn't shy away from that because
introverted feeling finds that very
interesting right now i can accept it in
you even if you're in a situation that
others would not consider completely
empathizable and of course from that
point on there will always be work to be
done but we live in a world where so few
people are willing to be that patient
with other people right and to really
take the time to get to understand what
brought people to the place that they're
in and to allow them the time that they
need to bring themselves out of it and
the reason people don't want to allot
that patience is because they don't feel
the same sense of patience for
themselves right we live in a world
where emotions are constantly bypassed
ignored shoved down repressed so when an
fi user shows up and suddenly doesn't
shy away from the messier or darker
parts of what someone's going through it
is an incredible breath of fresh air it
is healing on a soul level to people
truly just being seen
in that way
can be unbelievably healing for someone
who is in a dark spot we also know how
to clean out mess because we've been
through a lot of them so messy empathy
is what i call this gift and i think
that again it's not exclusive to enfps
but we have our own take on it when we
combine that mindfulness with that messy
empathy we can really help people
understand themselves and why they do
the things they do and that is an
incredibly well-rounded toolkit to have
once we learn to
sharpen all of our tools for lack of a
better metaphor all right gift number
six is one that i almost never see
people attributing to enfps but that is
absolutely a core trait of enfps which
is critical thinking so again because we
extrovert our kind of idea generating
wild zany part of our personality people
don't always understand just how
critically enfps are thinking about
things right and this goes back to
questioning convention we do not accept
anything at face value extroverted
intuition
naturally cross-contextualizes
information so what that means is every
time you learn something new you don't
think about that thing as an isolated
piece of information you naturally let
it mingle and mix in with all of the
other pieces of information that are in
your brain and start to understand it's
like this thing but not like this thing
it tracks with this pattern it doesn't
track with this pattern and inside the
mind of any ne dom so that's enfps and
entps you eventually have this complex
web of which things are like which other
things and which things are not and that
allows for incredibly creative thinking
and anyone would be remiss to not
understand that critical thinking and
creative thinking are the same damn
thing you cannot be creative without
being critical about the existing system
and you cannot be critical about the
existing system without being creative
in the way that you're thinking around
it the frequent incessant questioning
that goes on inside of your mind about
why everything is the way it is why
people are thinking the way they're
thinking why certain systems are forming
the way that they're forming that is
absolutely critical thinking just
because it's not as focused and narrow
as what you might normally associate
that term with does not mean that it's
not creative critical and inquisitive
about its approach and again to really
accept this gift in ourselves i think we
have to get away from that like zany
bubbly sociable enfp stereotype that
really presents a one-dimensional
picture of this type your ability to
think critically about any issue that
comes your way is one of the most
valuable skills that you have and that
will help you to excel in absolutely any
area that you choose to consciously
apply it to gift number seven this is
one that i actually really relate back
to our spiritual sensitivity so the fact
that we are bad at doing things that we
don't feel aligned with that don't
naturally energize us that we don't feel
on some level like we are on earth to do
the fact that we naturally tend not to
interact with all of that junk means
that the stuff we do interact with we
get so passionate about and we can be so
influential in sharing because we
genuinely feel it all of us have had the
experience of like someone trying to
sell us something or someone trying to
convince us of an idea and you can tell
this person themselves doesn't
necessarily believe this right this
person themselves wouldn't buy this
product or ascribe to this philosophy
they're just being paid by someone else
to sell it to us there is such a
difference when you're speaking to
someone who really really believes in
what they're saying and who really wants
to get a certain message or a certain
resource out to people and when enfps
are in that energy when they are aligned
with what they care about and they're
sharing it there is this aliveness to
them that is absolutely unparalleled and
they can have an incredible influence in
any field that they choose and while
this one may not be specific to enfps i
think that more often than not enfps are
just naturally really incredible at this
because again we cannot do stuff we
don't care about we just can't do it so
when we are doing something usually our
whole entire heart is in it and people
can feel it right and that makes change
and that is a huge huge gift to harness
and to share with other people okay last
gift this is one that again i hardly
ever see talked about but i think is
actually
so incredibly prevalent in almost every
enfp that i've ever personally met which
is being an incredibly adept
down-to-earth communicator so possessing
the ability to take complex topics and
make them relatable and digestible for
other people so really marrying the
abstract with the concrete is such a
virtue of extroverted intuition and when
you pair that with extroverted thinking
which is our tertiary function which we
do access quite a bit especially from
kind of our 20s onward you get this
ability to communicate complex things
very very simply and very relatably and
i think there have been lots of famous
enfps over the years who have become
incredibly talented motivational
speakers who have really changed the way
that people think about things not just
because they had good ideas but because
they were able to bring those ideas down
to earth and make them understandable
for people this is also why nfps in
general tend to be very talented writers
authors communicators via the written
word because our thoughts make sense to
us on an abstract level but extroverted
intuition is always connecting the
abstract to the real right we kind of
have one foot out the door in theory
land and the other foot in the door of
reality and that allows us to make very
meaningful and very powerful connections
between things so we are the masters of
metaphor we are excellent at getting
really obsessed with something and then
translating it to people in a way that
they will understand in layman's terms
and there's this air of complete
unpretentiousness about it and that
makes the information so accessible to
people because it also doesn't grade on
their ego right condescending talking
down to people being overly theoretical
or not being theoretical enough makes it
difficult for people to understand
concepts but when we communicate
directly and simply and can cater what
we're communicating to the audience that
we're communicating to we can become
incredible teachers in any topic that we
choose to take on it's not just about
being social right it's about
understanding what makes up other people
and how we can communicate with them in
a way that they will actually understand
and our natural ability to do that can
be quite astounding can be something
that we don't necessarily realize other
types don't have a natural inclination
towards so again enfps do not undervalue
yourself here right communication is a
tool that very few people can use
effectively and the fact that you are
naturally somewhat more skilled at it
than most should be something you're
capitalizing on if you aren't already
okay i think that's it for today i just
wanted to talk about some of the stuff
that i don't really see getting
attributed to enfps and i don't know why
because we have a lot of skills that fly
under the radar and that a lot of us
don't necessarily think to work on right
because if we can take any of these
eight gifts these eight skills these
eight abilities whatever you want to
call them and really really sharpen them
and hone in on them and start using them
to move in the directions that we want
to go in in life it's kind of like we're
just harnessing our natural superpowers
and why would we not want to do that
right do not spend your life trying to
develop the superpowers of some other
type that are never going to come
naturally use what you have accept what
you have create a new story in your mind
if you think that any of these things
are weaknesses and understand how you
can use them to your advantage because
that is how you are absolutely
going to shine in life and i want to see
us all shine so if there's anything you
think that i have forgotten please leave
it in the comments and once again if you
are interested in the enfp soul bootcamp
make sure you check out the link in the
description it's completely self-paced
and you can take it anytime and it's all
based on just making you feel more alive
more like you and more empowered to go
do your thing in the world all right i
love you guys i'll see you next time and
as always let me know which enfp videos
you would love to see next
[Music]