hey guys i'm heidi preeb before you get
started on this video i just wanted to
hop in as i was editing it i didn't feel
100 right about this video because i
never gave a disclaimer at the beginning
which i am now editing in at this point
to let you know that i am not a licensed
trauma therapist this is not
professional or clinical advice around
handling triggers so there's a lot of
different things that we tend to use the
word trigger to reference so sometimes
we use the word trigger to reference a
ptsd or cptsd reaction which can be very
intense very overwhelming for the
nervous system and for a lot of people
specifically if you have not had
trauma-informed care in the past it can
be really difficult to try to implement
in the moment solutions for dealing with
those triggers and i want to emphasize
that if that's something you're
struggling really intensively with this
video might not be the video that's
going to help you with that particular
problem this video is just going to be
about cultivating mindfulness whenever
you can and wherever you can around your
smaller scale trigger responses this is
not meant to be professional mental
health advice it's more using the word
trigger to describe the kind of smaller
scale almost more pop culture definition
of the word trigger which might actually
be more reminiscent of having an
extremely strong emotional reaction to
something that isn't entirely present
but again i just want to make that clear
because there can be a very giant
sliding scale between what triggers mean
to different people so it could be a
slightly exaggerated response for one
person and it could be a complete
amygdala hijack for the next person if
you struggle immensely with triggers i
really recommend you get the help of a
professional therapist or counselor who
can help you work through those my
therapist has actually very recently
helped me work through my single biggest
trigger that i literally thought i would
have for the rest of my life and so i
know firsthand that that can be
extremely important work to engage in
and i just want to make clear that
that's not what this video is this video
is about mindfulness around triggers
only okay
now we will properly get started hey
guys heidi preeb here so today's video
is one that i have been joking i'm gonna
make for a while but i decided to
actually sit down and make because i
think that there is a very specific and
particular thing that often keeps us
from choosing secure responses in
moments of heightened emotion which is
the inability to distinguish when we are
triggered versus when we are accurately
picking up on something that is
happening in our environment that is
unfair and that we ought to react to
with anger or with pushback or by
asserting our need for boundaries right
so i think that a lot of us myself
included often have this kind of black
and white thinking where it's like okay
either i am completely wrong and the
other person is completely right and my
reaction is pure 100 trigger response or
i am completely justified i am correct
about my need to be offended and upset
and therefore whatever i say next is
also completely justified and i think
that this absolutely false dichotomy we
create accounts for why so many of us
who are well-versed in attachment theory
in triggers who have a lot of
self-awareness around what comes up for
us and what situations still get stuck
in this trap time and time again of
going no this time it's not a trigger
response this time i'm perfectly
justified in standing up for and
fighting for myself and i am here to
clarify that it can be both and that is
the problem there can be situations in
which and i would argue more often than
not the situations in which we get
triggered are situations where true
injustice is happening where we truly
ought to stand up for ourselves where
assertiveness and drawing boundaries are
actually needed but because we can have
that kind of all or nothing thinking
where we think either i'm triggered
therefore i'm being irrational about the
entire situation or if there's a true
reason to be upset i must not be
triggered i must be completely justified
in everything that i'm feeling we can
fail to see the nuance that would allow
us to actually resolve situations where
we truly ought to stand up for ourselves
and defend ourselves properly because
when we have a true offense that happens
something that we truly ought not to
stand for but there's a trigger response
that happens on top of that often our
reactions are so over the top that they
get written off completely so for
example let's say someone is speaking to
me unkindly and maybe my body gets a bit
defensive and i'm like ooh i'm on alert
all of a sudden right but let's say also
i'm having all of these memories all of
these flashbacks flooding my brain of
other times i've been spoken to unkindly
i'm telling myself a very strong and
very intense story about what it means
that that person is speaking to me
unkindly and so now i'm reacting not
just to what they've said but i'm
reacting to every person who has ever
spoken to me unkindly and all of the
emotional intensity that i've ever felt
about all of that and so my reaction to
them might actually be 10 times stronger
and 10 times more offensive than the way
that they spoke to me and now i'm the
one giving a very over the top response
and so i get written off as a rational
and as a result the very justified
feelings that i had of not being spoken
to kindly never get properly addressed
because i buried the proper response
beneath the mountain of trigger response
and so what this video is about is not
at all dismissing the way we feel and
not standing up for ourselves it's about
recognizing in which situations getting
triggered actually keeps us from
standing up for ourselves and defending
ourselves in the way that we ought to
because we don't have an appropriately
sized reaction to the situation at hand
and if we want to have appropriately
sized reactions we have to get really
good at differentiating what about this
situation is upsetting me versus what am
i bringing into this situation from the
past that doesn't belong here and this
is something that is incredibly
difficult to do it takes a very long
time to practice before it starts
happening automatically but the sooner
that we can start making those
distinctions at the least mentally the
more we can begin practicing moment by
moment when we get triggered and when
those things come up so when you find
yourself in those moments where you're
like i am really angry and i think that
this time i'm right this time i'm
justified this time i'm not triggered i
am right step one is to stop and
acknowledge both things can be true you
can be right you can be in an unfair
situation you can deserve to stand up
for yourself and you can also be
triggered okay
two things can be true and usually when
you're triggered it's because you're
encountering some injustice right so
it's actually highly likely in those
moments that both things are at least a
little bit true so the first thing to
remind yourself of is this is not an
either or situation it's very possible
that i'm both facing injustice and also
triggered sometimes that's all we can do
for the day sometimes that is just our
cue to check out of the situation and
return to it at a different time and i
completely and totally respect anyone
who chooses that option when they're
triggered
but if you can and if you've been
practicing this for a while and you're
able to make that mindful distinction
you can move on to the next step which
is intentionally separating out what is
from the past and what is present so a
good way to do this is to think very
carefully about exactly what just
happened objectively and try to
understand what let's say in the last
five minutes was said or done that you
specifically take issue with versus what
is the greater story that you're fitting
that action into so things that happen
in real time can be resolved in real
time things that happen in real time
that we put into a story in our heads
about who we are what a certain person
thinks of us etc etc etc cannot be
resolved in real time because they don't
exist in the moment they exist in our
minds so step two is about getting
really really clear on what actually
happened in the last two to five minutes
that i'm upset about versus which
memories am i drawing on or which
stories am i fitting this into that are
causing me to have a trigger response
most individual one by one things that
happen in life can be dealt with fairly
calmly and presently if we're able to
stay emotionally present but the big
overwhelming things the giant stories we
tell ourselves about our self-worth and
our value and how other people treat us
and the past traumas and past challenges
and past histories we've dealt with
those things cannot be dealt with in one
singular moment right so often if the
problem feels so giant that only a
humongous explosion could possibly fix
it and possibly get our points across
there's a good chance that there's a lot
of accumulated energy there right
that you're fitting this moment into a
series of moments that have happened
over the course of your life that cannot
possibly be resolved simply and in this
exact situation and that's again a good
indication that part of what you're
dealing with is a trigger so step three
though this could also be step one
honestly is getting very aware of what a
trigger feels like in your body and this
will be different for absolutely
everybody depending on what your
triggers are and i want to i probably
should have made this clear earlier but
i want to distinguish between let's say
a ptsd trigger which might be so
physiologically overwhelming that you do
not even remotely have the wherewithal
to stay present during it and something
like a complex ptsd trigger which is
more about the emotional overwhelm that
you're feeling in the moment and those
can be a little bit easier to deal with
and to reason with in the moment but it
depends on your history on the amount of
help you've gotten through therapy at
this point etc etc so there are a lot of
things that can influence whether or not
you're able to do any of this work but
what you want to do even in retrospect
if you're able to is to just recognize
when i'm triggered how do i feel in my
body for some people it feels like my
body's on fire and i have so much energy
and i can't get it out of me and for
other people it feels like i need to
instantly get away from the situation
there's no way i can interact i'm frozen
i can't respond okay so recognizing what
it feels like when we're triggered and
we can do this in retrospect by looking
at times that we know we've been
triggered in the past and recognizing
what physiologically came up for us in
those moments will help us to pinpoint
in the present whether or not that's
what's happening so it can even help you
to write down some thoughts that you
tend to have when you're triggered right
like for me i feel like i am right i
know i'm right i've never been this
right before and no matter what the
other person says the only thing that
matters is that i show how right i am
or this person is completely irrational
nothing they're saying makes sense i
have absolutely no need to engage with
this person and i do not owe them even a
second more of my time right both of
those are triggered thoughts because
when we are not triggered we tend to
think more rationally and in a more
balanced way so we can have thoughts
like i believe i'm right but there also
seems to be a really big discrepancy in
the way that we're seeing the situation
so maybe i need to gain some additional
understanding of the other person's side
of things so that i can respond in a way
that brings us to a place of peace
rather than continuing to escalate the
tensions or this situation is straight
up not healthy for me so i'm going to
set some really clear yet compassionate
boundaries and go take the time and
space i need to recoup but often when
we're in a triggered state things feel
either 10 times more or 10 times less
immediate than they truly are so it
might feel like if i don't resolve this
conflict right now i'm going to
absolutely die there is no way out of
this conflict other than to get all of
my feelings out there absolutely right
now and to not wait even another second
to address it that's often a triggered
thought right most conflicts can wait a
little bit until both people calm down
and can approach things from a more
centered place and the opposite is also
true if there is something that can be
resolved in the moment but we're feeling
like i never want to see this person
again i want to completely disengage
from this i want to give no timeline for
when i'll come back to this conversation
i need unlimited open-ended alone time
that's often also a triggered response
so are you either creating distance from
a situation that could be dealt with in
the moment or are you creating immediacy
in a situation that could actually be
dealt with with a little bit of time and
space either way those thoughts are good
indications that maybe you're
experiencing a trigger right because
again most things can wait and also most
things can be worked through so if
you're feeling either like this
absolutely cannot wait or this
absolutely cannot be worked through
there is a high likelihood that a
trigger is present for you and i'm not
suggesting that if you're let's say
super triggered into avoidance mode and
you really cannot stay present with
warmth and empathy that you stop and
deal with the situation right away not
at all i'm also not suggesting that if
you are in super anxiety mode that you
completely disregard all of your
feelings and tell yourself this doesn't
need to get dealt with also not at all
what i'm suggesting and this is the
final stage of the process is that you
leave choosing an appropriate response
up to a future version of yourself who
is more regulated and this requires
building self-trust over a long period
of time right so when you are able to be
mindful in the moments that you're
triggered watch them pass and then
eventually notice yourself returning to
a more regulated state whether that
takes 10 minutes 10 hours 10 days you
eventually begin to learn there is a
version of me that exists underneath all
of my triggers all of my trauma all of
my wounding and that version of me knows
how to make calm and rational decisions
and in those moments of trigger if you
can recognize you're triggered all you
have to do the only thing you have to do
is trust your future self to work this
out and recognize that now is not the
time to be making major decisions to be
resolving major conflicts or to be
sorting through major emotions that are
currently burning at a thousand degrees
inside of your body right
trust that your emotions matter that
your experience matters that the
feelings you are feeling in this moment
matter and you will address them
but you will not address them in this
triggered state because it will not go
well right so if someone is truly
disrespecting you and you feel
overwhelmingly angry and you recognize
that that anger is not just about the
situation you're in but that you're also
bringing a lot of past wounding into the
current situation the kindest and most
compassionate and most secure thing you
can do for yourself is recognize yes my
feelings of offense matter yes i'm
picking up on something real here and
i'm not being treated properly but i am
not in the proper condition to state my
case in a way that is effective right
now so i'm going to take some space from
it and i'm going to come back to it and
i'm going to let my future wise self
deal with this situation and then your
future y self actually does have to come
back and deal with the situation or else
you will lose your own trust in that
process right but the beautiful thing
about all of this is that at the end of
the day your issues get dealt with the
pain that you feel in the moments where
you're hurt and triggered gets
acknowledged it just doesn't get
acknowledged in a way that makes it
worse than it needs to be because when
we respond from a triggered place we're
often not responding from a place that
other people can find connection points
within right and in order to resolve
situations we need to be able to state
our case clearly decisively with proper
boundaries in place and without needing
the other person's approval and with our
own self-respect alive and in check so
all of this is to say that the question
that so many of us get stuck on time and
time and time again is am i triggered or
is this finally the situation in which i
am just perceiving things correctly i am
right about everything and i deserve to
go off on this other person and i think
that often the answer is yes you're
right about something you're perceiving
some true injustice and also you are
triggered and if you can learn to hold
both of those things to be true in your
mind in the moment that a trigger goes
off you're going to set yourself up for
a much better future where you're able
to actually address things in a way that
people listen to so that when injustices
come up they don't go unacknowledged
because people just write you off based
on the fiery over-the-top response that
you have to them or the lack of response
that you have to them so this is in the
long run about learning to actually get
those needs met and get those difficult
situations confronted and dealt with
without making it worse or losing your
own self-respect in the process all
right that's all i have to say for today
on this topic but let me know in the
comments any thoughts feelings aha
moments that you're having as you move
through the process of unpacking your
own trigger responses and figuring out
which challenges get in the way for you
when it comes to communication under
stress as always i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and i will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]
you