Sign number eight that you might have an
anxious attachment style is that you
struggle to set boundaries and keep them
because you're afraid that they're going
to drive people away. So, this is very
similar to that problem of early on in a
relationship suppressing your needs
because you're afraid that if you show
your needs, someone else is going to get
out of there. And the reason why so many
anxiously attached people really
struggle with boundaries is not because
you don't necessarily know where your
boundaries should be. It's because you
are afraid that having a boundary means
someone else is going to choose to walk
away. And because you really do rely on
other people in many ways to help you
stay emotionally regulated and it feels
very very terrifying to think about
losing someone who you are closely
connected to. You are often willing to
do away with your boundary and not stand
by it in order to keep that person in
your life. And this is not to say that
you have to compromise your boundaries
to keep people in your life, but often
that's what it viscerally feels like is
going to happen,