hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel we
are talking about a topic that I have
been wanting to touch on forever but it
kind of feels like such a big can of
worms that I haven't been sure if I even
want to open it in the first place and
that topic is healing the Dynamics of an
anxious avoidant attachment relationship
so most often where you see this showing
up is romantic Partnerships people with
anxious attachment Styles tend to
gravitate towards those with avoidant
attachment Styles and because these
relationships are made up of two people
who are largely psychologically
one-sided and we'll talk about what that
means in a minute what tends to happen
is that a lot of conflict comes up and
it can feel really difficult to resolve
so wear a lot of anxious avoidant
couples end up is in this place where
they're both trying to change the
relationship Dynamic through convincing
their partner to try to change
themselves or their attachment issues
and in this video what we're going to go
over is one why that approach is
absolutely not going to work and two why
a lot of the more conventional
approaches that I see people taking
towards healing avoidant anxious
Dynamics also tend to not work at least
Beyond a kind of surface level
so let's say you have an anxious
avoidant couple they both think the
other one is the problem but they want
to work on their relationship and so
they decide to let's say go to couples
counseling the approach that I often see
used when it comes to Healing anxious
avoidant Dynamics is actually an
approach that pushes each person further
into their own wounding so you might
have an avoidant partner being
encouraged to hold more space for the
anxious partner's emotions and you might
have the anxious partner being
encouraged to give the avoidant more
space to do their own thing and lick
their own wounds and while this might
kind of work on a surface level it might
get you a relationship where you're not
triggering each other as actively that's
not the same thing as healing the
relational Dynamic to heal the
relational Dynamic on a deep level what
needs to happen is both parties need to
do significant Shadow work so before we
get into what that looks like
interpersonally I'm going to talk about
what the shadow looks like for each of
the people in this scenario as well as
how that shadow can actually get in the
way of doing the deep healing work that
would be required to actually fix the
relational Dynamic on a deep level so
really quickly if you don't know what
I'm talking about when I say terms like
the Shadow or Shadow work I do have a
video explaining that terminology that I
will link in the description of this
video as well as a video series that
goes over the biggest blind spot which
kind of covers the shadow of each
attachment style specifically so you can
check those out and then come back here
when you're kind of up to date on the
terminology but for those who are
familiar with what I mean when I say the
term Shadow let's talk about what is in
the shadow for the different ends of the
attachment Spectrum so quick recap our
psychological Shadows are comprised of
the behaviors the impulses the needs the
feelings the thoughts that we learn to
systematically suppress at a very early
age because they were non-adaptive in
the caregiving environment that we grew
up in so we learned to maximum is what
gets us care protection and safety in
the world and to minimize what is going
to threaten our safety whether that's
literal safety or interpersonal safety
an anxious and avoidant attachment
Styles tend to have directly opposite
things in their Shadows so those who
lean more avoidant learned early on if I
show my true needs and my true
vulnerabilities and my true pain I will
be relatively consistently met with
disgust or rejection so their strategy
for staying in connection becomes
self-reliance and making sure that
they're monitoring their own emotional
experience and not putting their needs
too heavily on other people what goes in
the shadow is their vulnerability and
need so those are the things that they
start repressing even from their own
conscious awareness so it's not that
they're walking around with all of these
needs and vulnerabilities at the surface
that they're consciously deciding not to
express most of the time they aren't
even consciously aware of having those
needs and then on the flip side you have
the anxious strategy so those who air
more anxious on the attachment Spectrum
learned and internalized from a young
age if I don't make my needs very loudly
and consistently known I will be
abandoned so the connection strategy
that gets developed for those who have
anxious patterning is to keep their
emotional needs right at the surface of
their own conscious awareness and make
them known to other people anytime they
start to feel as though distance is
developing between themselves and
someone else so this is a proximity
seeking strategy it's oriented around
keeping capable others close to them so
that they can get help having their
needs fulfilled and what goes in the
shadow when you develop this type of
strategy is your own self-reliance
because if you feel like solving your
own problems will cause you to get
abandoned and be alone in life your mind
is going to start naturally repressing
information about how to solve your
problems and become independent now
here's where we get into trouble a
secure relationship is a relationship in
which self-reliance and vulnerability
and proximity seeking are held in
balance and in a relationship where both
people are secure both people have a
good balance of each skill so they're
able to be open and vulnerable and to
seek out proximity to their partner when
that's what's needed for the connection
but they're also very capable of solving
their own problems taking space and
behaving independently when that's
what's healthy for themselves in the
partnership in a relationship where you
have one person who leans more anxious
and another who leans more avoidant both
is going to start over functioning in
their area of comfort so the anxious
party is probably going to be providing
most if not all of the proximity seeking
behaviors in the relationship and the
avoidant partner is likely going to be
providing most if not all of the
emotional self-containment behaviors in
the relationship so both people are
psychologically one-sided at least when
it comes to their emotional development
they can only really do half of the
secure thing and the other person
represents their own shadow so for the
avoidant person dating an anxious person
who has all of that need and
vulnerability right on the surface
represents the parts of themselves that
they naturally learn to repress very
early on and saying goes in the opposite
direction for the anxious party the
avoidant other represents the traits of
stoicism and calm and emotional
containment that they learn to repress
in themselves early on so it's like you
have two people who are living literally
with their own shadow and this Dynamic
is chronically reaffirming each of their
respective worldviews so the avoidant
has that world view of I'm okay I can
take care of myself I can meet my own
needs I'm psychologically regulated but
you are not okay so there's this belief
that others are incompetent unable to
take care of themselves unable to meet
their needs and will always be looking
for something or needing something from
the avoidant and on the other side of
things you have the anxious worldview of
I'm not okay you're okay so it's this
idea of I can't take care of myself I am
not capable of navigating the world
without a protective well-regulated
other but you're okay so other people
are intelligent and well regulated and
capable of consistently providing me
with the protection that I need and of
course both of these things are
happening unconsciously we're not going
around actively having these thoughts
but they probably are showing up
relatively consistently in our partner
choices and we're going to talk a lot
more about why that's important and what
those World Views mean when they start
to shift as this video goes on so it
might feel really easy to go well why
not just let each person play to their
strength and in some relationships I
want to be clear this actually works so
it's really difficult to paint avoidant
and anxious attachment with broad
Strokes because you can have someone
who's just a little bit reserved on the
avoidant side of the attachment Spectrum
or you can have someone who is severely
avoidantly attached and those things are
going to look very different same with
the anxious side of things you can have
someone who's just a little bit clingy
when they get into a relationship or you
can have someone who is very severely
anxiously attached and again those two
things are going to look very different
so in a situation where you're dealing
with just a little bit of avoidance or
anxiety on either side of the spectrum
you might actually never need to do the
work it might just be that if you're a
little bit needy you find someone who's
a little bit reserved or vice versa and
you actually have a reasonably stable
life together but if you find yourself
further down that attachment Spectrum
you're likely to have these Dynamics
where humongous wounds are present in
both parties and each one starts to look
at the other as the sole cause of the
problems in the relationship the reason
why this ironically works so well is
because both people are right when
they're pointing at the other and saying
you're the problem it's almost poetic
because both people are psychologically
one-sided and so they're truly able to
see the flaws in the other but each one
is unable to see the flaws in their own
behavior so again I have that video on
blind spots that you can check out below
that gives a little bit more information
on what this process looks like but the
Trap that most people get stuck in when
they want to heal their anxious avoidant
relationship is the Trap of believing
that their partner needs to change in
order for the relationship to get better
and maybe they pay some kind of lip
service to the idea that oh we both need
to change and get better but because the
partner's flaws are so much more
apparent than your own if you're in one
of these Dynamics you're probably going
to have this idea that your partner
needs to change like 80 percent and you
need to change like 25 percent and in
the rest of this video we are going to
talk about how that logic is absolutely
flawed because not only do you both need
to do Shadow work in order to change
this Dynamic but your partner changing
is likely to be highly triggering for
you in ways you do not expect if you are
not also doing that change work in equal
magnitude and this is something I see
getting discussed almost nowhere so
we're going to go into discussing it
right now when we think about getting
our partner to change whether that means
we are anxious and we're wanting our
partner to become more emotionally
available or whether we are avoidant and
we're wanting our partner to become more
emotionally regulated and independent we
tend to imagine that our partner is
going to retain all of the qualities we
already like about them but just take
away the things we don't like and add in
some traits that we want them to have in
reality this is not at all how
attachment healing works when you're in
a partnership or a family system of any
sort when one person changes everybody
else has to make compensatory changes in
order for the system to remain in
equilibrium so the first thing I rarely
see talked about but that I believe has
to be at the core of our awareness if we
want to heal avoid an anxious relational
Dynamics is the fact that your partner
ceasing to over function in the way that
they have been over functioning in your
relationship so again that example of
the anxious person providing all or most
of the proximity seeking behaviors or
the avoidant party providing all or most
of the emotional regulation skills if
either one stops over functioning in
that area the other one is going to be
forced to step up and start doing
something that they have never learned
to do before which is going to mean
confronting your own shadow and that
might be deeply uncomfortable for you so
you might have an avoidant person going
I want my partner to become more
independent and to stop looking to me to
solve all of their emotional issues okay
if they do that and they truly become
more independent and more self-regulated
it means that you are probably going to
have to be responsible for much more of
the proximity seeking behaviors in your
relationship so instead of waiting for
them to come to you and to provide the
warmth and attention and structure for
how your emotional lives will function
as a couple you're going to have to
learn to approach them in equal measure
and this guarantees that at some point
you're going to need to feel vulnerable
and put your pride down and explain to
them that you feel either neglected
vulnerable in need of something or any
other host of emotions you're not used
to having to express because if you're
used to being smothered you don't have
those needs all you need to do when your
anxious partner is over functioning in
the proximity seeking category is do
what you're already comfortable with
which is pulling back and asking for
space asking for connection if your
partner becomes someone who who has a
thriving Act of social life outside of
the relationship and who stops needing
you to regulate them as much at some
point or another will become very
vulnerable which might cause you to feel
disgust with yourself because again that
vulnerability that need for closeness
and intimacy that need for co-regulation
has always been in you but you've shoved
it into your Shadow so if your partner
stops over functioning in that way
you're going to now need to start
pulling things out of your Shadow and
integrating them in order to keep the
relationship functional and the same is
true in the opposite direction so if you
have an anxious attachment style and you
really want your partner to be more
emotionally available what that means is
not just that your partner is going to
start sharing their emotions with you in
a self-contained way it also means that
your partner is going to start being
genuinely vulnerable which might feel
like neediness to you and you might feel
disgusted by that because if you're
partner is showing their vulnerabilities
and their neediness and keep in mind
that because this is likely a new skill
for them as someone with an avoidant
attachment style it's actually going to
be a very clumsy and undignified
expression of vulnerability most of the
time that forces you to be in your own
adult self and to serve as that secure
base for your dysregulated partner and
the problem here is that if you have an
I'm not okay you're okay worldview and
that's what you are secretly the most
comfortable with is feeling like you're
not okay but someone else is capable and
taking care of you it is going to feel
very threatening to temporarily have
that reversed when in reality secure
relationships function like this all of
the time so Partners trade off acting as
the secure base for one another and each
one is comfortable letting the other one
be a little bit dysregulated and
stepping into the adult role and then
letting those roles shift so both
Partners know how to be in their own
self-responsibility as well as in their
own vulnerability
but again if you are anxious and you
have this negative view of yourself that
you are so pathetic and incompetent the
only thing worse than being you as far
as your unconscious mind is concerned is
being someone who needs you if you're
down here that must make them way way
down there and so it's highly likely
that you're going to get a little bit
triggered if your partner truly does
start becoming vulnerable with you and I
have to say as someone who has been
healing from the more avoidant side of
the spectrum this has absolutely
happened to me more than once in
Intimate Relationships where I've been
kind of sloppily learning my needs and
how to express them and my
vulnerabilities and I've been met with
contempt and discussed by more anxious
leaning Intimates and ideally that's
something that you can work through
right the anxious partner can and if
they want the relationship to work has
to learn to work through feelings of
disgust that arise when their partner
starts needing them the same way that
they need their partner because secure
relationships do involve healthy forms
of dependency but this is the first
thing that we need to be aware of if we
want to start healing anxious avoidant
Dynamics if our partner starts to truly
heal it's going to force us to reach
into our shadow and start developing the
traits that we were once putting
entirely on our partner to provide in
the relational Dynamic so the avoidant
partner is going to need to learn to do
those proximity seeking behaviors and be
vulnerable and emotionally open and
direct about their needs and the anxious
party is going to need to learn to be
secure enough in themselves to act as
that secure base without feeling
panicked or disgusted when their
avoidant partner needs them for
emotional co-regulation now the second
reason why this kind of classic approach
of I'll just get my partner to change
and then our relationship will heal does
not work is because if your partner were
to go and do that deep healing work
where they're able to integrate their
Shadow and become a psychologically
balanced person with clear access to
both reason and self-reliance and
emotional vulnerability it's likely that
they would not want to be with someone
who hasn't done that same work so if
your partner is severely anxiously
attached and they truly develop their
more rational side they're going to
realize that it's not rational to be in
a close intimate relationship with
someone who isn't emotionally available
and so the likelihood of them wanting to
stay in that relationship goes down and
the same is true in the opposite
perspective if you have an anxious
attachment style and you want your
partner to become more emotionally aware
what's going to happen is not that
they're just going to share their
positive feelings towards you with you
they're also going to share what hurts
them about the dynamic with you and if
you're not prepared to hear that and to
absorb that feedback and respond to it
maturely and take responsibility for the
ways in which you are hurting your
partner that relationship probably is
not going to last very long so again
unless both parties are doing the Deep
Shadow work here and both are working in
real time to up their skill set to
compensate for the ways in which their
partner was previously over functioning
it's likely that this is not going to
end well now the third and last reason
why this traditional route of just
trying to force our partners to change
does not work and once we talk about
this we will get into what to do instead
is that it can feel deeply
psychologically threatening to have that
external representation of our own
shadow disappear and so we might start
unconsciously without realizing that we
are doing this trying to force our
partner back into the role that we're
more comfortable with them playing if
your subconscious mind is only deeply
comfortable feeling like I am not okay
and somebody else is and will take care
of me your partner healing and admitting
to you and themselves all of the ways in
which they're not okay is likely to make
you feel panicked subconsciously so what
you're going to need to give up in this
process is the fantasy of never having
to grow up and instead just finding a
perfect savior who can fix the way
you're feeling forever it's also going
to force you to confront the fantasy
that you are eternally innocent and
never do anything wrong or never do
anything to hurt other people because
again the more you're avoiding partner
gets in touch with their own raw
emotions the the more they're going to
feel the pain of the ways that you have
rejected or hurt them it's going to take
a lot of emotional maturity skills to
handle that and on the other side of
things if you are the avoidant partner
and your anxious partner starts getting
more in touch with their independence
and their self-reliance and their
capability you're going to have to
actively stop the part of your
programming that is probably going to
come online and start derogating or
thinking down on all of these positive
changes that your partner is making
because that puts you back in the I'm
okay they're not okay worldview and this
is going to force you to face the
reality that the reason why you've had
so much trouble forming and maintaining
healthy relationships is not just
because you keep dating emotionally
disregulated people it's predominantly
because you lack the vulnerability and
the proximity seeking skills that would
be required for you to be in a healthy
relationship with someone who is both
rational and emotionally balanced so in
each of these cases the short version is
if you are in an anxious avoidant
Dynamic your partner's healing is likely
in some small or large way to be
triggering for you you and you are going
to need to learn how to confront what
comes up through your partner's healing
work by looking at your own shadow and
being willing to integrate the things
that normally your partner has been
holding on to and representing for you
so instead of asking yourself the
question how do I get my partner to
change here are five questions I
recommend you ask yourself instead in
order to get down to the actual deep
work that is going to start shifting
your relationship in a positive
direction if it's something that you're
both willing to work on question one am
I ready for the power dynamic in this
relationship to drastically shift so am
I ready either for my partner to develop
more Independence and to stop needing me
in many of the ways in which they
currently need me or am I ready for my
partner to start needing me and becoming
dependent on me in ways that they
currently are not either of those shifts
are going to cause major waves in the
power dynamic as it currently stands in
your relationship so the question on
either side of the equation is not how
do I get my partner to do more of what I
want it's am I willing to give up the
main source of power that I currently
have in this relationship in order to
allow my partner the space they need to
change get in touch with their own
shadow and heal their relationship to
themselves that's a very drastic change
for both of you but in my opinion that's
kind of the number one agreement people
need to make if they want to start
changing their anxious avoidant
relationship are we both willing to give
up to a certain extent the major sources
of power and control that we feel inside
of this relationship question two how am
I going to deal with the insecurity that
will arise when I finally start look
looking at my partner as my true equal
so this might mean as the avoidant party
recognizing that you are not trapped in
this relationship you are choosing to be
there intentionally if you always kind
of feel like you're better than your
partner in certain ways and they're
lucky to be with you you pretty much
never have to feel vulnerable if you
were to date someone who you were
conceding to see as a true equal which
does not mean that you have all the same
skills all it means is that you are
finally stepping into the
self-responsibility of acknowledging I
am choosing to be with this person Ergo
we are equal in the responsibility that
gets taken for this relationship that is
going to once again force you to deal
with the feelings of Shame and disgust
and vulnerability that you repressed at
a very young age
on the flip side if you are the
anxiously attached party and you are
willing to truly see your partner as
someone who needs emotional comfort and
protection to the same degree that you
do it's going to force you to deal with
that feeling of absolute fear that there
is not a strong capable competent savior
out there who can come along and always
be okay enough themselves in order to
care for and protect you both of these
acknowledgments require giving up a
certain degree of safety that we feel in
the world question three and this one's
a tricky One how can I proactively work
to stop triggering my own shadow traits
in my partner now again this is
something we do not do consciously but
that comes up unconsciously all of the
time so in my video attachment healing
and The Dark Night of the Soul which I
will once again Link in the description
of this video I go into in more detail
how we often unconsciously elicit traits
in others that we find unbearable to to
deal with in ourselves so the avoidant
partner without realizing it might
actually be eliciting more neediness and
more proximity seeking from their
anxious partner because they are unable
to embody those traits in themselves and
the same is true in the opposite
direction the anxious party might be
triggering more self-reliance and
Independence in their avoidant partner
because they find it too threatening to
embody those traits in themselves so in
this process we have to learn to step
into the parts of ourselves that are in
our shadow so if you have an avoidant
attachment style you are going to have
to learn to embody proximity seeking
behaviors vulnerable emotional
expression and dependency in appropriate
ways and this is risky not just for you
in your own self-image but it's risky
for the relationship because again your
partner might feel disgusted by those
behaviors and not want to be with you
anymore that is a very real threat that
I am absolutely not going to sugarcoat
for us any time we start showing up
differently in any sort of relational
system the entire system is going to
have to learn to adjust or try to push
you back into your regular role through
subtle forms of shaming or whatever it
is so that's something to be aware of
once again am I willing to embody the
traits that my partner usually holds
within this Dynamic and withstand
potential rejection in the face of me
doing so
same is true in the opposite direction
if you are anxiously attached are you
willing to develop your Independence and
autonomy and self-regulation even in the
face of subtle pushback or subtle
shaming from the other party in the
relationship again it's risky because it
might lead to forms of rejection that
your partner is not even aware they're
doing and this is absolutely true for
both parties in this Dynamic so again am
I willing to proactively work to embody
my shadow traits so that I'm not
subconsciously triggering my partner to
over embody them and am I willing to
face the fact that I might get rejected
in the process and have to deal with a
lot of Shame which is often what comes
up when we're doing that shadow work
question number four to ask yourself in
this process and this is one that might
arise once you've already done a
significant amount of healing work on
both ends of the spectrum
am I willing to take a sober look at
this relationship and be realistic about
the ways in which we are and are not
compatible
so a lot of the time when anxious and
avoidant individuals get together the
main thing they have in common is their
shared world view of who is okay and who
is not so the anxious party goes I'm not
okay but you're okay and the avoiding
party goes that's right I'm okay and
you're not okay and so they have this
very compatible way of experiencing
relational Dynamics
but if they both heal themselves into
secure people who are able to function
independently now what happens is you
have to look at the relationship and go
okay do we like each other now that the
main purpose of being together is not us
projecting our deep psychological wounds
onto each other do we like hanging out
do we enjoy what we talk about when
we're sitting around talking do we want
the same lifestyle do we have aligned
goals do we share a sense of humor all
of these things that are the first
things secure couples tend to look at
are probably only going to be things
that are brought into your screaming
awareness once you've started to do
enough healing work because before that
point your attachment issues are
probably going to be the main source of
conflict in your relationship you're not
even going to get down to those
compatibility issues and something I
also rarely see being brought up but
that I think is fairly prevalent is that
attachment wounding very often causes us
to seek out Partners who are not that
compatible with because there's no risk
of true intimacy on either side if both
people kind of no in an intuitive way
this person just isn't really going to
get me even if we were both fully healed
and okay because we're just not that
similar we just perceive the world in
drastically different ways and that
serves both parties in being able to
perpetually feel misunderstood and keep
blaming their partner for all of their
problems in the relationship so I look
at Mutual Shadow work or healing work in
relationships as the process of kind of
sobering up after being really drunk in
a relationship potentially for many
years it's like waking up the next
morning and actually looking at the
person in bed next to you and going is
this a person who I want to keep seeing
and the answer might be no and that's
okay too it doesn't mean that your
relationship didn't matter or was a
waste if anything a relationship that
brought you into mutual healing and
growth and left you both more secure
than where you started is a
fantastically successful relationship
but it doesn't mean you're going to want
to stay together once the healing has
happened and I think that's something
that it's actually really important to
ignore knowledge and to be aware of as
you're going into that healing process
at the end of it we might have less
anger towards each other because we're
no longer projecting everything onto
each other but we might also have less
attraction towards each other because
maybe we just learned that the secure
versions of ourselves don't have that
much in common and again that is totally
and completely okay it's just something
you're going to want to ask yourself
about and be aware of going into it and
Fifth and final question we're going to
talk about today when it comes to
getting down to what actually makes an
avoidant anxious Dynamic heal is the
question am I willing to focus at least
five times harder on my own change in
growth than on my partners again it is
so much clearer to us to see what our
partners are doing wrong than it is to
see what we're doing wrong so for every
one thing we see our partners doing
wrong we might have to acknowledge it's
now time to dig five times as deeply
inside of our ourselves to unearth the
one thing that we're doing wrong that
we're struggling to see it is going to
feel like our partners are most of the
problem if our own negative
contributions to the relationship
Dynamic are in our blind spots now what
I'm not saying here is that if you're in
some sort of emotionally abusive Dynamic
the solution is to work five times
harder on yourself in that case healing
work and Shadow work is actually going
to make you much better equipped to
leave the relationship with a low risk
of returning to it okay so that work is
still important the work of making
yourself more self-sufficient and
independent or interdependent on healthy
support networks is still going to be
the skill that's going to help you out
of your current situation and the kind
of asterisks that I want to put on this
point is that it doesn't count as real
Growth work if what you are doing is
just becoming more and more one-sided so
I've kind of seen this trap that both
sides of the spectrum can fall into
where let's say the avoidantly attached
partner starts learning different lingo
for communication skills and then they
use that lingo to just become more rigid
and more demanding about the exact
logical sequence that everything has to
follow in the relationship like okay now
that I know about non-violent
communication every time you're not
using non-violent communication I don't
have to listen or take you seriously
right that's not healing work that's
just one more way of being rigid and
one-sided and dismissive of emotions
that are not expressed perfectly and on
the flip side I've seen anxious people
get really into let's say attachment
healing work and what they're doing is
just getting more and more and more
fixated on their partner's behavior and
how they can use attachment Theory to
manipulate their partner and this is
also not healing again you're just
further repressing the Shadow and
doubling down on what you already know
and calling it healing that's not going
to get you anywhere in order to heal an
anxious avoidant relationship dynamic or
in order to heal your own attachment
wounding whether you are in a
relationship or not the only way to
really do it to really get down to the
core of it is to confront the wounding
that originally created the attachment
patterning you have been in for the
majority of your life you need to do
that work of uncovering and becoming
aware of your own blind spots deeply
grieving the pain of what caused you to
develop that sort of one-sidedness and
then be willing to bring into your
conscious awareness and start working
with that which you have systematically
suppressed throughout the majority of
your life that is the only way deep
healing work actually happens and that
is the only way deep healing work
actually happens inside of a
relationship you cannot deeply and
sustainably heal something by just using
little tricks to make your woundings
more compatible again maybe that works
if you're only a little bit wounded and
it doesn't cost that much to make those
tiny concessions for the rest of your
life but if you are deeply wounded that
is not going to cut it you have to do
the work of becoming more
psychologically balanced figuring out
what's in your Shadow bringing it into
your conscious awareness and being
willing to integrate it and become a
version of yourself that doesn't need
another person to hold and represent
that shadow for you that's the only real
way healing these types of relationships
works so on that note I will leave a ton
of videos in the description of this one
that can get you kind of started on that
path if it's something you want to take
on as always I'm very curious about
where you're all finding yourself in
this process as well as what's coming up
for you as we talk about this let me
know in the comments what you're
thinking feeling experiencing wanting to
work on in this department I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]