hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel we
are talking about what I kind of think
of as the Cardinal error of those who
Veer anxious on the attachment spectrum
and when I say the Cardinal error I
don't mean that this is something you
are intentionally doing to sabotage your
relationships what I mean is that there
is this kind of blind spot this area
where your attachment system does one
thing that tends to get you the direct
opposite of what you want out of your
relationships So today we're going to
talk about what that is as well as how
to work with it when it comes up so that
you end up getting more of what you do
want and less of what you don't instead
of the opposite in your relationships so
with no further Ado the Cardinal error
of those who fear anxious on the
attachment Spectrum tends to be not
leaving any room for the possibility of
separation or loss in the relationship
so when you have an anxious attachment
system what your system is hardwired to
do from the time you are at a very young
age you have learned to seek consistent
proximity to your attachment figure and
when you were young this was very
adaptive for you right when we are young
children it's good to keep our
caregivers close especially if they are
a little bit inconsistent in the
attention that they're able to give us
it is very adaptive for us to want to
make sure that we are always on their
minds that we always have their
attention that if we need them for
something they will definitely be there
within a reasonable time frame to
respond to us
however what often happens when you grow
up with an anxious attachment style is
that you don't learn to change those
rules when you get into a romantic
relationship as an adult adult romantic
relationships and the process of
building intimacy with a romantic
partner absolutely requires you to seek
proximity to feel close and connected
and bonded to another person to share
yourselves with each other to understand
what each other is thinking and feeling
and experiencing and in perfectly equal
part having healthy intimacy requires a
separation process so I always kind of
visually represent intimacy personally
as this kind of coming together and
pulling apart process when you are
aligned when you are intertwined
emotionally intellectually spiritually
physically you're kind of merging your
experiences and that can be a very
wonderful feeling but you cannot stay
constantly locked in this space intimacy
also requires is a pulling away process
where the two of you return to
yourselves have time to integrate and
analyze what you have learned from that
merging process both about the other
person but also about yourself and how
you are different from that other person
and this process of coming together and
pulling apart will happen if you are in
a secure relationship consistently for
the rest of the time that you are either
functioning as a couple or Alive on this
earth now the problem is that for those
who Veer anxious on the attachment
Spectrum this kind of merging this
feeling of we're so together we're so
aligned we're so on the same page can
feel so good that as soon as that person
starts to pull away a little bit your
natural impulse might be to pull them
back in right and make sure that you
stay like this the problem is that this
is not sustainable in a relationship you
need to be able to pull apart and come
back together so in this video what
we're going to specifically talk about
is how to become comfortable with that
pulling away process particularly in
moments when you're feeling a little bit
anxious or uncertain about why your
partner is pulling away so when does
this sense of anxiety about the pulling
away tend to come the most online for
those with anxious attachment Styles it
tends to happen in moments where you
feel in your gut like something is off
like ooh something about the way that
this person is texting me seems to have
changed I can feel I can perceive almost
a temperature difference in the way that
we're communicating with each other or
maybe we had a plan and suddenly they
want to change the plan or they want to
reschedule but they're not saying when
they want to reschedule for or maybe
we're physically in the same place but
mentally and emotionally I just feel
like they're not quite with me they're
not quite mentally in the room with me
and again in those moment that can feel
very triggering and very scary for your
inner child whose strategy for keeping
their attachment figures close is making
sure that in as many moments as possible
you are intimate you are connected you
are on the same page however what I'm
going to suggest here is that your
ability to maintain healthy romantic
relationships or close relationships of
any form as an adult rests upon your
ability to retrain your inner child and
to help them understand that moments of
Separation are not always negative
things even if there is some sort of
conflict or some sort of negative
occurrence in the relationship giving
both people the space to reconnect with
themselves re-regulate themselves and
come back into that sense of
togetherness with an increased
understanding of where the relationship
needs to have boundaries or where the
two of you need to be more
differentiated well that might feel
threatening at first that is actually
the kind of thing that allows a
relationship to be be healthy enough to
function long term so in that moment
when you are starting to panic when
something feels off and when every cell
in your body is screaming at you to just
find a way to make sure that you feel
close and connected again and to make
that feeling of anxiety over the fact
that you and your partner are different
go away this is the moment you need to
learn to slow way down instead of
rushing quickly past it to get that
feeling of dread to go away you need to
learn how to be present enough to gain
the wisdom that that moment is
presenting you with so for the rest of
this video we're gonna go over a series
of steps you can take when that moment
arises to help you use it to actually
make your relationships and your
intimacy with your partner feel deeper
more enriching and most importantly more
sustainable long term so step one in
this process is gonna sound super
counterintuitive when you feel like
something is off in your relationship
you're protecting that kind of change in
temperature you're looking at your
partner and going where are you I don't
know where you are right now I can't
find you inside of you instead of trying
to make things go back to normal and
seek out confirmation that nothing is
wrong nothing is off everything is okay
take a moment to accept that your gut
might be telling you something real
it's very possible that in this moment
something is not okay in your
relationship it's very possible your
partner is upset with you that your
partner is feeling turned off and that
there actually is some sort of problem
between the two of you now if you air
anxious on the attachment Spectrum
statistically speaking it's highly
likely that your partner airs more
avoidant the problem is that for many
people on the avoidant side of the
attachment spectrum they don't have a
particularly strong awareness if
something feels off or wrong for them
why that is and they're likely to be
telling themselves if I don't have an
explicit reason for why things feel off
or wrong and my partner asked me how I'm
feeling I'm just gonna go fine because
they're kind of emotional barometer is
not necessarily going to be particularly
sensitive so you might notice something
is off and they might tell you something
is fine and that might be a good faith
response they might truly not have
anything they can point to that they
feel like consciously is often the
relationship and yet you might be
picking up on something real
now the goal at this point in the
process is not to figure out what that
thing is and fix it a lot of the time
problems take a great deal of time to
emerge and for people to become
consciously aware of what and where they
are in a relationship what we're trying
to do at this point is just learn to not
panic at the thought that maybe there is
something wrong secure relationships
include things going wrong they include
Partners having conflicts having
differing interests having differing
perspectives finding ways in which they
aren't perfectly aligned but those
problems need time and patience to rise
to the surface sometimes it's not
uncommon in a relationship for something
to kind of feel off for a little bit and
for both people to not really know how
to put a finger on it and for it to take
a little bit of time for that problem to
properly bubble up to the surface where
it can be dealt with but in order for it
to Bubble Up to the surface it needs to
be given the time and space that is
necessary to do that which might require
things just feeling a little bit bit
uncomfortable for a little bit of time
and so step one is to just accept I'm
feeling something off I'm having a panic
response about it but it is my job in
this moment to remind my inner child
that it's okay for something to be a
little bit off in a relationship asking
my partner to reassure me that something
is not off when my body is telling me
that something is at least for me right
if I'm feeling anxious it means for me
something is off it's just gonna get us
this kind of ghost version of the
relationship and it's not really going
to work anyways right if I feel in my
gut like something is wrong I go to my
partner they tell me no no everything's
fine it doesn't make it fine I'm still
gonna feel that difference I'm going to
feel that disconnect we're not going to
be in that easy connected intimate space
that flows so naturally and your body
does know the difference so Step One is
accepting if you feel like something's
off then it is it is because it's at
least off for you inside of your own
body and it's your job to step in as
your inner adult and let your inner
child know even if my relationship has a
problem in it right now my relationship
with you as your loving parent is still
okay and I will take care of you through
whatever comes next so we don't need to
immediately panic and try to fix a
problem that isn't fully formulated yet
so step two is very tied in with this
step two is just allowing yourself the
space to recognize that what you are
doing when you are fixating on wanting
your partner to go back to normal and
act the way they normally do around you
is you are trying to get your partner to
re-regulate themselves so that you can
siphon regulation out of them now this
is not intentional it is not malicious
however it is a key part of attachment
patterning that comes online when we
revert to our child selves
when we are in child self and this is
often what happens when we get triggered
into an anxious attachment strategy we
forget that we are capable of regulating
ourselves as adults and we start looking
for someone else who seems competent and
regulated who can help us return to our
own sense of equilibrium the problem is
that when we are in child self we are
forcing other people into parent selves
when someone is in parent self they are
putting all of their own true emotions
and feelings aside in order to cater to
the needs of someone who is dysregulated
and when you are in a child self parent
self-dynamic things might get kind of
superficially solved in the moment but
in the long term that is not a
sustainable Dynamic whatsoever both
people in a healthy secure relationship
need to be in adult mode most of the
time so let's talk about what these
terms mean when we are in our adult
selves we hold ourselves responsible for
caretaking the feelings of our inner
child now that includes things like like
asking for what we want out of our
partners setting boundaries in our
relationships it does not mean that we
never need or ask for anything from
anyone and it also means that when we're
asking for what we want we are being
truly open to the fact that other people
might not be able to give it to us or
they might not want to give it to us and
in order to stay respectful of others
like an adult we have to accept other
people's limitations boundaries and
needs including their needs for things
like taking space to regulate themselves
so this step is probably going to be the
most difficult one for you if you have
an anxious attachment style and you're
feeling kind of triggered and activated
and desperate to get your partner back
to normal and what you want to do here
is get really clear in your own mind as
silly as this sounds between who you are
and who your partner is so chances are
if you're in child self you are
completely dissociated from your own
emotional experience and you are
probably staring at your partner going
oh my god get back to normal get back to
normal treat me kindly treat me with
warmth treat me with love how do we get
back to this place of intimacy
and the job here is to slow down and go
I am not located inside of my partner
that is them they are a separate person
for me I am located inside of me inside
of my physical body so let me take a
minute as stressful and as difficult as
it feels to locate myself what is it
like to be Me In This Moment
where is my butt is it on a chair am I
standing up where are my arms where is
my face
what's going on with my breath
what does it feel like in my stomach in
my chest in my neck
where am I and what Sensations am I
having in this moment and if you're
really struggling to access them notice
that
notice that you might be hyper tuned
into your partner's tiny facial
expressions and body movements and tone
of voice but you're finding it very
difficult to focus on your own just
notice that and name it right I'm having
trouble differentiating myself from my
partner right now
and I want to jump in here and just say
that it's not an uncommon response to
actually feel like you can't
differentiate yourself from your partner
when you're in a triggered State
sometimes we are having an emotional
flashback to a time when we were very
very young and there is a certain
portion of Our Lives where we actually
are not aware that we are separate from
our caregivers we truly think in our
little baby brains that our mom or
whoever our primary caregiver is is a
true extension of us there truly is not
this sense of I am me and you are you
and we are separate and so when we are
really triggered and flashing back and
feeling panicked we might actually lose
that sense of emotional differentiation
on a felt level between ourselves and
our partners we might truly kind of
forget that we are separate people of
course we're going to know that in our
brains but our emotional bodies might
not be remembering that and so this step
is all about doing whatever it takes to
get yourself emotionally differentiated
that could mean grounding yourself in
the body it could mean stepping out of
the room and calling someone and talking
to them about anything but your partner
it could mean checking your work email
if your work has nothing to do with your
partnership it could mean dropping in on
a group chat that you're a part of and
chatting about what you're going to do
this weekend you might want to make a
playlist of songs that do not at all
remind you of your partner but that do
remind you of your relationship with
yourself and that playlist might be
something you want to put online in
those moments where you're really
struggling with differentiation the
important part is doing something that
helps you remember that you are a
completely separate entity from your
partner because your emotional self
actually might not be remembering that
right now whatever it takes to get you
back into adult self is going to be
hugely helpful in that differentiation
process right what you're doing is
allowing you to go from here to them
starting to pull away and instead of
clinging and bringing them back you're
going to go okay let's see if I can
actually take a few steps back okay what
about a few steps more more and
acknowledging that this is a very
natural part of the process sometimes I
see those with anxious Styles talking
about how they're being avoidant if
they're taking space or if they're
exercising their autonomy
in a lot of cases you're not being
avoidant you're being secure it is a
very secure thing to when you are
emotionally dysregulated take some time
to Center yourself connect to the people
and passions and commitments you have
outside of your relationship
re-resource yourself and then come back
to the relationship only when you feel
like you are in your adult self and step
three is accepting exactly that
accepting that when you are in these
moments of disconnection when something
feels off but you can't put your finger
on it when you feel like some space is
starting to form in your relationship
recognize that this is that 50 of the
intimacy process that involves the two
of you separating so this is about
normalizing those moments of
disconnection for your distressed inner
child letting them know what's happening
is okay and it's a normal part of adult
relationships there will always be times
when partners are a little bit less
close than other times this will happen
in small and large ways over the course
of of your entire life so what you have
to do here is have a talk with that
inner child and let them know that the
fantasy they have of always being super
close and intimate and connected and
never feeling alone for a moment is not
a realistic portrayal of secure adult
relationships it's a fantasy and that's
a talk you're going to have to have with
that kid to let them down easy let them
know that secure love involves points
where you pull away from each other and
where you experience that sense of loss
and disconnection as a result and I want
to be clear that this is probably
especially true if you're in a
relationship where both people are not
securely attached or were not born
securely attached when you are working
with a higher number of triggers you are
going to feel more pain more moments of
separation more moments of loss because
you are both working your way towards a
new way of relating and that is going to
feel overwhelming for one or both of you
at various points and if you you want to
give your relationship the best possible
Fighting Chance of making it you're
going to need to learn how to tolerate
those moments without panicking and
accepting that they are going to be a
part of that process so this step is
just about orienting yourself maybe
yesterday or earlier today we were here
and now we're here and that's a good
thing we need to sometimes be here in
order to see each other clearly so this
might be the part of the process you
like less when it comes to intimacy but
you cannot have the true connected
non-enmeshed form of intimacy without
having this so step number four Once you
have taken the time to regulate yourself
co-regulate with people outside of the
relationship and achieve a sense of
acceptance over the fact that you're
going through a small or large period of
disconnection
now is your chance to understand based
on what you remember about yourself what
your adult self feelings and needs are
and then to communicate them to your
partner in an unenmeshed way so in order
to communicate in a non-enmeshed way we
first have to locate the feelings we're
having inside of ourselves
so in enmeshed feeling is I feel like
you're mad at me you can't have a
feeling that is located inside of
somebody else's body right that feeling
of someone else is mad at me what does
that feel like in your body does it feel
like this kind of tense energy where
you're feeling scared and frozen or does
it feel like this very activated kind of
stressed out panicked response like you
want to reach into your partner and pull
out whatever it is that you feel like
you're perceiving figure out what it
feels like in your body and communicate
your body's response using only eye
language I feel a sense of Disconnect
and I feel sadness about that and I
don't know what's going on but I know
that I've been feeling a little bit on
edge and I don't want to feel on edge I
don't like it so I wonder if we could
have a conversation where we just put
both of our feelings out there and maybe
I can share some ideas I've had about
boundaries or agreements I would like us
to make inside of this relationship so
that I can make sure that I feel safe to
fully invest in this relationship
and to continue to build it and if your
partner is down for that that's great
and if they don't really care or they're
not interested in having that
conversation that's also very important
information about what you need to do to
keep your inner child safe
right if I give my partner the space
that they need and then share my
feelings in an unenmeshed way and they
are completely uninterested in having a
conversation about that or accepting
that my feelings matter in the dynamic
at that point I kind of have to accept
that it's an act of self-abandonment of
Abandonment of my inner emotional child
if I stay in that relationship with
someone who is not showing any respect
for my inner child which I just realized
is already on step number five which is
figure out which agreements you might be
able to make to bring you back to a
place of equanimity I've been doing a
bunch of workshops lately with the
philosophy of authentic relating and
inauthentic relating a great deal of
what they talk about is how to establish
Equanimity in your relationships so how
do you stay respectful of yourself and
your own needs and boundaries with
respect to someone else's needs and
boundaries and in order to figure that
out in a healthy secure relationship
both parties need to be aware of what
each other's emotions emotions needs and
boundaries are and then you have to work
together to find a way to stay
respectful of both of those things which
will sometimes be in Conflict right so
if I feel like I want to be in constant
texting communication with my partner
and they feel like that's very
overwhelming for them and they would
like to text once every second day how
do we work together to negotiate a
common ground maybe I share what it
feels like for me when we're not in
constant communication and the stories
that I tell myself about what that means
and maybe my partner can share some
information with me about what's
actually going on for them and why they
don't really like texting and maybe the
story that I was imagining my partner
hates me they're uninterested is totally
different than the truth of their
experience maybe they just really don't
like checking their phone that often or
maybe they do feel like we've been in
too close of communication maybe they
feel like there isn't breathing room in
the relationship and maybe addressing
that problem and figuring out a way to
give the relationship a little bit more
room and space to develop at a natural
pace is actually the thing that ends up
making it last right we're not always
going to like the feedback that we hear
but if we're truly able to integrate it
negotiate our needs and boundaries and
figure out from a place of accepting
that loss is a possibility in the
relationship how we can merge and work
with those different needs we're going
to be giving the relationship the best
possible chance at succeeding the only
way to ensure that a relationship does
not succeed is to give it absolutely no
room for the two people to separate
healthy intimacy is 50 us but at least
also 50 percent me and you as
independent autonomous people and both
sides of the attachment Spectrum are
going to struggle more with one of those
States if you're avoidant that intimacy
might feel a lot more difficult to
tolerate if you are anxious the
separation part is going to feel more
difficult to tolerate but again if a
secure Dynamic is truly what you're
after that does not mean that you you
find a partner who is emotionally
regulated and able to always be here
with you being in a secure partnership
is going to require you to take some
time apart regulate yourself recognize
the ways in which you and your partner
are very different and always will be
and then come back together at a point
when both of you are able to communicate
clearly from your adult selves and if
you can learn to really embody and be
present with yourself and your inner
child through this process you're going
to give your relationships the best
possible chance you can give them at
surviving long term because again life
in a secure relationship will be a
Non-Stop process of coming together and
pulling apart and coming together and
pulling apart and whichever part of that
process feels more challenging for you
is the part where your growth lies next
alright that's all I have to say on this
topic for today as always I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other let me know
any feelings thoughts questions that you
have coming up in the comments section
of this video and I will see you back
here again really soon
[Music]