hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about integrity and in particular how to
maintain a sense of personal integrity
and self-respect inside of our close
relationships especially in moments
where it feels like those two things are
in conflict and what I want to go over
today is the concept of blind spots so
generally what we see happening in
relationships especially between people
where one is anxious and one is avoidant
is that both people start to feel like
the other one is 100% the problem like
they are doing everything right but it
is their partner who absolutely needs to
change so what we're doing this week is
looking at the different blind spots
that might be there for each of the
insecurely attached Styles so avoidant
fearful avoidant and anxious and we're
going to talk about what you might be
missing about how your own behavior is
unconsciously contributing to a
relationship Dynamic where there is
frequent conflict now what this does not
mean is that you are uniquely
responsible for the dynamic in almost
every case conflict is co-created but
what we're going to be doing today is
just taking a look at what you might be
contributing that you are not aware you
are contributing so this is kind of akin
to merging your car into a different
Lane and making sure that you're just
checking your blind spots before you
make any really important moves before
we make any important decisions about
our relationships we want to make sure
that we are checking our own blind spots
and not missing anything that we could
actually attend to and fix from our side
of the street so without further Ado
we're going to get into five blind spots
that are very common for anxiously
attach people and how you can start
working with those blind spots to have
less conflict in your relationships the
first thing I would encourage you to ask
yourself if you find yourself in a
relationship that is very conflict heavy
is am I engaging in a lot of people
pleasing behaviors or a lot of
self-abandonment behaviors because I
believe that it will bring me closer to
my partner and that it's what will
Foster intimacy between us and the
reason this is a blind spot is because
in reality people pleasing is a barrier
to True intimacy but that's not what
your attachment system is going to be
telling you if you air more anxious what
people pleasing does is it obscures your
actual self from the other person who
you are trying to get close to right it
kind of erases all of the dynamic and
interesting parts of who you are that
the other person might want to get to
know and what it does is instead
replaces all of that with a mirror of
the other person but people don't get
into relationships because they want
themselves perfectly mirrored back to
themselves they get into relationships
because they want to get to know
somebody else and so the more one or
both people turn towards people pleasing
the less and less energy gets brought
into the Rel relationship so a kind of
easy example of this is there was a
point in my life where I was new to a
city and I had a friend who was a very
social very active go-getter type and
when I came to the city he reached out
to me and was like hey let me know if
you want to be invited to some events or
be introduced to some people and I was
like absolutely yes but what ended up
happening was that this person was so
well connected and had their finger on
the pulse of so many interesting things
that I ended up feeling like I was kind
of following the around the city after
some time and I noticed the more time I
spent with them for some reason the more
I was suppressing myself and the more I
was deferring to what they thought or
what they wanted to do and then one day
this person and I ended up in an improv
class together and the game that we were
given by the instructor was this game
where both of us had to decide a secret
want that we had going into the scene so
some secret desire that each of our
respective characters would feel really
compelled towards and all of our actions
in the scene would be oriented towards
trying to achieve that thing so I had no
idea what this other person's secret
desire was and they had no idea what
mine was but what I noticed was that
when we got into the scene and we
started acting it out there was this
energy and this Dynamic interplay
between us that had not been there as
actual friends outside of the Improv
room in quite some time and I realized
that What's Happening Here is I am
bringing something Dynamic and active
into the the dynamic whereas in the past
I was just kind of acquiescing to what
this other person wanted to do and that
very Act of just wanting something that
had nothing to do with this person's
approval or with what they wanted gave
our interactions a lot more energy and a
lot more spark and interest and it
occurred to me that this was something
that needed to be happening outside of
this room as well if I wanted that
friendship to get back on track I needed
to be getting in touch with and bringing
more of my want and my interests to the
table or else there is going to be
nothing interesting between us to work
with and this is so so often the Trap
that we naturally fall into if we air
anxious on the attachment Spectrum the
Trap of thinking that closeness is about
sameness when in reality closeness is
about observing each other's differences
creating Dynamic contrasts to each other
and then learning from each other and
growing through the relationship in
order for intimacy to occur people need
to be able to see the edges of you right
or else they don't really know where
they end and You Begin and so there's no
real way to actually observe each other
and then get close to the person that
they are seeing so this is the first
blind spot that's very very common that
I encourage you to check if you're
starting to feel like your relationship
isn't working very smoothly are you
bringing your full self to the table and
I want to note that this might be a
challenging thing to do because you
might feel like your number one desire
or want is closeness with this other
person so this has to be achieved in a
kind of roundabout way you have to spend
some time getting to know yourself
getting to know who you are outside of
any of your relationships and only then
are you going to be able to bring that
self into a relationship and give it a
good shot at working second blind spot I
encourage you to check if you're finding
yourself in a lot of conflict in your
relationships and you a anxiously
attached is check during the conflict
itself so when you're in the middle of
an argument or in the middle of a
difficult conversation with your partner
ask yourself am I advocating for my
needs right now and trying to kind of
negotiate an outcome that's good for
both of us or have I switched into a
mode of trying to get my partner to
regulate me because these are two
completely different goals when it comes
to arguments or conflicts if we are
going into a conflict trying to make our
position clear so make our wants or
needs or whatever it is that feels
important to us clear to the other
person and then hear out their wants and
needs and find the best possible
solution that meets as many needs as
possible that's what it looks like to
resolve conflict from an adult place but
when our attachment patterning comes
online we often regress without
realizing it to a more childlike state
of reasoning when you start feeling
panicked because maybe you're worried
you're going to lose your partner or
something about your connection is going
to be threatened you might start looking
at at them not like another adult who
has their own needs and wants that you
need to take seriously as well but as a
parent figure who you have to either
abandon all of your own needs and wants
to agree with in order to get into their
good graces or who you have to fight
back really hard against in order to get
your point across and as soon as we are
in this state a feeling desperate for
regulation from our partners we are no
longer arguing from an adult to adult
place and what I'm not saying here is
that it doesn't hurt or feel challenging
or inherently disregulated in a lot of
cases to be in conflict with our loved
ones it absolutely does but what we want
to be doing is making sure that we are
coming into the conflict as regulated as
possible because if our primary goal in
the interaction is to get the other
person to make us feel better it's very
easy for us to start losing track of the
points that we wanted to make and start
either fawning or fighting or whatever
it is that we think is going to get them
to pay attention to us and help us to
soo the way that we're feeling and this
is not going to be conscious whatsoever
right so when we're disregulated and
we're looking for regulation out of our
partners we're generally not saying that
to ourselves in our minds we're just
thinking things like how do I get them
to care about me how do I get them to
see how much pain I'm in how do I get
them to see how much hurt they are
causing me and it's not that we don't
want them to see see any of that right
relational wounds are important to lay
out and be clear about but we don't want
to be treating them like the paramedics
to those feelings when they are also
having a challenging experience of their
own we want to go find the paramedics
elsewhere so when we're in Conflict we
want to find ways to either talk to
somebody else spend time with ourselves
discuss it in therapy figure something
out that will allow us to go back into
the conflict from a more adult and
regulated place because only from that
place are we going to be able to calmly
and clearly Express what the issues are
without getting hijacked by our own
psychology which is otherwise going to
inspire us to do whatever it takes to
just get that person to like us again
and often what happens is the issues we
wanted to bring in get lost in the bath
waterer when that becomes the mission so
once again you just want to check if you
find yourself in these con conflict
Loops am I actually going into conflict
regulated and clear about what I want to
talk about or am I generally going into
conflict feeling really emotional and
desperate for my partner to make me feel
better again even if it feels like
that's what's fair and that's what they
owe you it's not necessarily giving you
the best chance at actually getting the
resolution that you're looking for so
it's just something we want to keep in
mind am I here seeking resolution or am
I here seeking regulation they're two
very different goals the third blind
spot I encourage you to check in on if
you air more anxiously attached is
whether this relationship has become one
of the main organizing principles of
your life so essentially an organizing
principle is something that the rest of
our lives starts orienting around so I
kind of think of it as a little center
of gravity in our lives and what I'm not
saying here is that it's bad to have a
relationship as one of the organizing
principles of your life particularly
when the relationship gets more serious
so maybe when you are married to someone
or living with them or have a family
with them it of course makes sense to be
making major decisions in your life
based on that relationship but very
often if we a anxiously attached there's
a tendency for a relationship to start
feeling like an organizing principle
well well before it is necessarily
useful for it to be one so if it's
starting to feel three or four dates in
like you're already mostly
subconsciously willing to structure your
entire life around this relationship or
like your mood day-to-day is heavily
dependent upon your interactions with
this person that might just be a little
yellow flag in your mind that you might
want to raise and go does it actually
make sense at this point in the
relationship for this much of my
thinking and feeling to be oriented
around this other person who I don't
even necessarily know that well and if
you find that it is already happening
that early what's likely also happening
is that way too much pressure is being
put on something that's new because the
healthy way to build a relationship is
for two people who have strong centers
of gravity elsewhere in their lives so
jobs or social networks that their lives
rotate around meet each other and kind
of peer into each other's lives for a
bit and see hey what does this person
value what's important to them how do
they like to spend their time and from
there they can figure out the ways they
naturally want to start combining their
lives or not but if you are abandoning
all of your other centers of gravity
very early on in this process once again
there's kind of nothing for that other
person to peer into and see and so it's
going to be really tricky for you to get
to know each other well there's this
quote that I cannot find the attribution
for but I stumbled upon it years and
years ago and always loved it which is
the only way to stop caring about
something is to care about something
else way more and I think that this is
actually really great advice for people
who air more anxious on the attachment
Spectrum instead of spending your time
trying to stop overthinking or stop
obsessing if you're finding yourself
really fixated on a relationship instead
can you fill your time and attention up
with something else that you really love
and the more you're able to do that
again the more you are bringing that
Dynamic full self into a relationship
which gives it a lot more to work with
with and ironically which ends up giving
it the best chance at actually
flourishing down the line the fourth
blind spot you might want to check if
you find yourself in a lot of conflict
heavy relationships as an anxiously
attached person is asking yourself the
question am I exercising enough self-
protection to allow my partner to make
mistakes and be a human being so what do
I mean by this when we don't know how to
protect ourselves and we only know how
to to be in a state of
vulnerability what that means is that
when our partners are having a bad day
or when they are in a little bit of
their own attachment BS or when they are
frustrated or just otherwise not really
acting optimally we are not going to be
okay because if we are vulnerable all of
the time it means that we are
perpetually open and receptive to other
people's stuff and that would be a great
thing in a perfect world where nobody
else had any of their own trauma or
stuff to deal with but very often other
people have a lot of their own stuff
that comes up and sometimes that means
they're going to have a bad day and be a
little grumpy or a little short or
they're not going to have the attention
span that we wish they had to pay
attention to us but if the only thing we
know how to do in that situation is take
it personally and be hurt by that what
it means is that we're going to be
forcing an unrealistic expectation on
our partners to always be regulated and
okay in a secure relationship what it
means is that both people are able to
trade off on that secure base role so
some of the time one person is feeling
disregulated and the other one steps
into that role of going I'm okay I've
got you let's figure this out and then
just as often it flips around in the
other direction and both people value
each other's competence enough as well
as their own competence enough to be
able to feel comfortable in both
positions but this requires a very
specific skill set one that avoidantly
attached people tend to have
overdeveloped and secure people tend to
have developed at the right extent which
is the ability to sit with a person who
is in their own stuff who is struggling
with their own wounds and go you know
what this isn't about me even if they're
being short with me even if I feel
rejected by them even if I feel like
it's not particularly Fair they're
treating me I know how to counsel myself
through it I can sit with myself and go
this person and the way that they're
showing up right now is not a reflection
of who I am I am my own person with my
own feelings and my own internal world
and I don't lose sight of that when
someone else is mad at me or frustrated
with me and I can hold my own
ground and then once this person is no
longer in their BS or once they're no
longer disregulated or once they're no
longer behav behaving in a way that's
uncomfortable for me then we can do the
relational repair that's needed to
address whatever came up for me inside
of the dynamic at the time that that was
happening but if every time there's
something going on for my partner that
puts them in a not okay State I feel
completely desperate and disregulated
and panicked now I'm not really giving
my partner the opportunity to be a human
being and to make their own mistakes and
to have their own off days doing that
requires the ability to pull back notice
when something that someone else is
doing is not really about us tend to our
own experience for a while and then
return to the relationship when it feels
like we're both in a better state to do
repair so sometimes if I find this
challenging I literally picture the part
of me that feels hurt as a child and I
imagine myself holding that child's hand
and going hey this person in front of us
who you're feeling hurt by that's
actually them just having a bad day
that's actually just the stuff that they
don't know how to cope with there's
nothing wrong with you though you are a
perfect beautiful child full of
vulnerable emotions and you and I are
going to go play somewhere and then
we're going to come back to this
situation when it feels better to return
to it and I find that often this
visualization helps a lot because it's a
natural sense that most of us have to
want to protect children so if we find
some part of ourselves that feels like a
child and we can visualize ourselves
protecting that it often goes a long way
in differentiating ourself from the
other person and the fifth and final
blind spot we're going to talk about
today is one that's a little bit more
zoomed out or a little bit more meta so
this is about the type of partners that
you continuously choose so ask yourself
if you find that you are chronically in
Conflict heavy unresolvable relational
Dynamics am I choos Partners who are
genuinely emotionally available or am I
consistently going for partners who seem
all good all fine like everything is
sunny on the surface expecting that that
emotional vulnerability will show up
eventually or is it possible that I
actually find emotional vulnerability a
little bit of a
turnoff and this is important to think
about because as we work towards
healthier and more sec attachment Styles
we want to find more and more secure
people to co-regulate with and the thing
about secure people is that they show
their emotions too and they want that
healthy trade-off of secure base roles
and so if you find that you are
consistently attracted to people who
don't show much vulnerability that might
be something that you want to sit with
and
examine is it that you're seeing this
person as slightly more of a parent
figure than as an adult to adult partner
and if so what would it take for you to
get more comfortable in a relational
Dynamic where both of you are showing up
as your adult selves which means holding
space for each other's insecurities
vulnerabilities and
challenges and if that feels really
unattractive to you that might be
something that you want to do some
self-inquiry
around why is it that I don't feel
comfortable stepping into that role for
someone else and this inquiry is
probably going to help you a lot in
choosing Partners who are more secure
but of course that often requires doing
a lot of internal work to make ourselves
ready for that type of partner and so
like all of this this is a journey but
today I just wanted to go over some of
the things that might be happening
inside of your own relationship Dynamic
that you might not see as a problem but
that are in fact working against your
ability to see one another clearly and
resolve issues at their
core all right that's all I'm going to
say for today but as always leave any
questions or thoughts that you have
coming up as you go through this video
in the comment section below I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]