hey guys heidi preep here this week we
are talking about early signs of
attachment healing so these videos are
not about how to do the healing work
they're not about what it's going to
look like when you are secure it's just
about taking note of what some of the
signposts might be early on in the
attachment healing process that show you
you're headed in the right direction so
today we are talking about the anxious
attachment style and what it looks like
to begin to heal from an anxious
attachment so sign number one and this
is a big one and a difficult one is that
you start to recognize that you are
responsible for which types of
relationships you are engaging with so
when you are in an unhealed state as an
anxiously attached person it is very
easy to feel like you are chronically
the victim of your circumstances right
so it can feel like you're always being
treated wrong you're always being
slighted that for whatever reason people
just do not give you the love that you
believe you deserve but as you begin to
heal from the anxious style you start to
recognize that a lot of why you feel
that way is because you tend to chase
people who cannot give you what you need
but as you start to heal from this
attachment style you start to realize
that you are responsible for which types
of people you are continuously pursuing
if you are going after people that you
know from the get-go are kind of
emotionally unavailable that you know
don't actually want the kind of
relationship that you want or who maybe
tell you outright i don't want to be in
a relationship with you you are
responsible for the fact that you are
bringing those relationships into your
life as opposed to being conscious about
the type of relationship you want and
waiting patiently until you meet someone
who you can build a true foundation of
emotional intimacy with so this step of
the process is about realizing that you
have choice in ways that you may not
have always known you had choice right
you may have always thought that you
just love too hard that you just give
too much but in reality if you are
giving to someone who does not want to
receive or if you are loving someone who
does not want your love you are not
truly being loving caring and giving
you're being a little bit manipulative
by trying to reel someone in and change
their mind about you so that you feel
better but you are not respecting what
they truly want which might be to be
left alone to not be in a relationship
right so recognizing that when you are
crossing people's boundaries like that
you are not loving too hard you are
refusing to respect someone else's bid
for autonomy and that you are
responsible for the dynamic that
develops as a result of that is a very
painful lesson to learn but it's also
really indicative that you are starting
to become consciously aware of your
patterning and the way it plays out
because to be anxiously attached means
that you are constantly unconsciously
searching for someone who seems like a
parent figure to have relationships with
and the problem with seeking out someone
who's like a parent figure is that
you're probably going to be chasing
people who don't show much emotion like
a parent does not because you believe
that means they can cater to all of your
needs but in reality what you're
probably going to end up doing is
chasing avoidantly attached people who
probably aren't able to give you that
sense of emotional intimacy that you're
looking for but your problems will not
be solved by them opening up and
learning to be secure your problems will
only be solved when you are able to
develop that secure base inside of
yourself so that you're able to
recognize what you need in a partnership
why you've been chasing people who can't
give you that and how you're going to
need to start showing up differently in
order to have that kind of partnership
that's where the real healing work
begins and when you're able to get to
that stage of the healing process you
are absolutely well on your way to
beginning the work that actually needs
to get done on attachment healing sign
number two that you're starting to heal
from an anxious attachment style is that
you're able to see limerence for what it
is so limerence is kind of the fancy
psychological term for having a really
intense crush that you believe down to
the core of your being is true so i saw
this tweet the other day that went viral
that was like a crush is just a lack of
information and i was like that is
absolutely so apt right we all do it we
all get little crushes on people where
we make them up inside of our heads and
we decide they have all of these traits
that we don't actually have any way of
knowing if they have or not right until
we get to know them better and actually
figure out who they are and what they're
all about but to have limerence around
someone means to believe in the things
that we have made up about a person
despite concrete factual evidence in the
real world showing to us that that is
not true right so being limerent about
someone means kind of pitting this
redemption fantasy on them and deciding
that we will feel better and things will
be good forever if only we can get that
person to love us in the very specific
way that we want them to i don't think i
need to explain in concrete terms why
this tends to go so wrong so often but i
do think that it's a very key sign of
healing for the anxiously attached style
and the fearful avoidant when they're
able to recognize that the limits they
have is just that a fantasy and a lack
of information and that yes they
absolutely might get to know this person
and truly find out pieces of information
about them that they love and that they
really value and treasure but to not
have limerence means to accept
any scenario in which reality goes
against your fantasy and to not try to
push your fantasy onto reality in order
to make yourself feel better so sign
number two that you're starting to heal
from an anxious attachment style is that
you're able to recognize and name
limerence for what it is and not try to
interfere with reality by pushing your
fantasies onto reality right
again it's really hard to stop doing
that right even securely attach people
get crushes and invent little things
about the personalities of other people
inside of their head but the difference
is that they're able to recognize when
they're doing that and also when it
becomes counterproductive to the
relationship but when you have an
anxious attachment style that is
unconscious and unhealed you often
aren't able to recognize when your
limerence is getting in the way of
actually getting to know someone so sign
number two that the healing process is
starting for you is that you're at least
able to consciously recognize when
that's happening when you are resisting
reality in favor of this fantasy that
you have in your head about someone and
bonus points if you're able to start
consciously fighting against that and
finding methods for staying present and
allowing yourself to be a little bit
disappointed when someone doesn't act
the way you expect them to act but
recognize that it is their right to be
who they actually are not to be the
person who you think of them as in your
head right doesn't mean it doesn't suck
doesn't mean it doesn't hurt but you're
able to recognize i don't get to lash
out at someone because they're not
reading the script that i wrote for them
inside of my head and never communicated
to them so you're no longer trying to
make reality conform to your fantasies
you're accepting that reality sometimes
sucks but if you persist with it there
are some wonderful jewels you could
arrive at when you actually get to know
someone for who they are not who you
want them to be sign number three that
you're starting to heal from an anxious
attachment style is that you're able to
recognize the value of self-regulation
and you're actively working to start
cultivating strategies around it so the
unhealed anxious attachment style really
struggles with self-regulation they tend
to believe that when i'm feeling bad
when i'm struggling with my emotions the
only way to feel better is to get
someone else to help me regulate myself
or to give me comfort or validation or
whatever it is that i feel like i need
in order to be reassured that i am okay
self-regulation means having strategies
for reminding yourself that you are okay
in situations where it's not necessarily
appropriate to consistently reach out to
other people insecure attachment means
that you're able to both co-regulate
with other people and self-regulate
internally when need be and i really
like to think of self-regulation as just
the process of building a relationship
with yourself where you are accountable
to yourself you trust yourself and you
respect yourself and i do have another
video on this that i will link in the
description of this video i think it's
called how to build a healthy
relationship with yourself and it just
goes over some of these small steps we
can take towards becoming more
internally self-regulated and feeling
like we have that secure base we want so
badly from someone else inside of
ourselves so that we do not have this
chronic bleeding wound that is an
external locus of control where we feel
like we can't regulate ourselves through
difficult times so sign number three
that you are starting to heal from an
anxious attachment style is that you are
able to recognize the times in which
self-regulation is needed even if you
can't do it yet right that's step two
step two is being able to take steps in
that direction and form strong
consistent self-regulatory strategies
but step one is just recognizing in a
situation where maybe you're inclined to
lash out or incline to demand attention
from someone else that actually this is
a situation where it might be more
useful for you to be able to regulate
your own emotional experience and
approach other people in a calmer state
right building that awareness brings you
into step one of the healing process all
right that's all i have to say for today
on this topic but let me know in the
comments anything that resonated for you
or any aha moments that you're having in
the process of healing your attachment
style as always i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and i will see you back here
again soon
[Music]