hey guys Heidi prep here welcome back to
my Channel today is a video that is
partially a rant if you've been around
for a while you know that maybe a third
of my videos start off this way but I am
getting very sick of a particular thing
that I keep hearing people say online in
pop culture and what that phrase is is
people claiming they are too nice
I would like to State for the record
that I don't believe there is such a
thing as being too nice I think we live
in a world that is brutal and where
people are largely actually quite
inconsiderate towards each other and
that often when we say we are being too
nice what we actually mean is that we
are having too many Bond responses now
the problem is that the average person
does not know what a fond response is so
they assume that the problem is that
they're just too nice and in order to
try to resolve the problem they then
become giant inconsiderate who
don't take anyone else's needs into
account whatsoever and I think that this
issue at large really feeds into the
current culture we have of hyper
individualism where the narrative is
like cut people off look at everyone
else's toxic you're not getting along
with someone it must be because they're
a narcissist and what is this culture
doing for all of us it is for the most
part making us more isolated more lonely
and more truly misunderstood than we
were before and I think that the problem
is we are missing the middle ground here
so on one end of this kind of pendulum I
see Fawn responses what is a fawn
response a fawn response is part of what
Pete Walker who is a psychotherapist who
specializes in complex PTSD calls one of
the four F responses the four F
responses are what happens when our
sympathetic nervous system is activated
and we are in what is commonly thought
of as a fight-or-flight response so
generally this is when we're picking up
on some sort of perceived threat in our
environment and our bodies are
responding to it as though it is real
danger and in these cases whether we are
in real danger or not our body tends to
choose one of four responses we either
fight we become combative and ready to
go into battle whether that's physical
or emotional or we go into flight so we
try to get out of the situation or we
might freeze and kind of dissociate or
become numb to the situation or stop
responding to it or we might Fawn when
we are fawning what we're doing is
almost giving ourselves Amnesia about
all of our own wants and needs and
deciding in that moment that the only
thing that's important is giving the
other person or people involved what
they want or need and the fun response
is actually very adaptive in many cases
so when we're young if we're in the
presence of intimidating authority
figures who are going to punish us in
some way for asserting our own wants and
needs it's adaptive to stay quiet numb
ourselves to our own wants and needs and
defer to whatever the authority figure
wants in fact I would go so far as to
say in North America this is how we
train and condition children to behave
right what is going to elementary school
other than getting punished if you
assert your wants and needs at a time
when you're supposed to be listening to
the authority figures and doing
something else so I think that so many
people and I I think women might be a
little bit more likely on average to
have an overactive Fawn response than
men based on the way that women are
socialized which is to be polite and
agreeable and not make a fuss but the
problem is that we mix up that obedient
Fawn response with the experience of
being a nice person being a nice person
does not mean failing to State your
wants and needs and giving other people
whatever they want being a nice person
means making your own wants and needs
clear and then also listening to other
people's wants and needs and finding
solutions that work for everybody which
could be a range of things it could be
okay tonight we'll eat where I want and
tomorrow will eat where you want or it
could be let's find a place we both kind
of like or it could be let's go eat at
different places for dinner so we both
get what we want because that's more
important to us than having this meal
together there are so many different
solutions that can be found when you are
choosing the nice response of asserting
your own needs listening to other
people's and then finding what works for
both of you so if this is a pendulum and
we have fawning over here and we have
kind communication in the middle what's
over here is being inconsiderate and
saying okay I'm going to go from never
asserting what I want all the way over
here to only asserting what I want and
assuming that if anyone else wants
something different it's their job to
speak up for themselves I'm not going to
ask I'm not going to pay attention to
anyone else's wants I'm going to assert
the crap out of my own wants and needs
and if anyone tells me it makes them
uncomfortable I'm going to call them
toxic now are there times to assert your
own wants and needs and not worry about
other people's yes is that usually the
case no usually the case is if we want
to be pro-social beings who have happy
relationships we need to start speaking
up for ourselves as well as
incorporating what other people want to
need and depending on where you're
starting from if you err on the side of
fawning you might need to do a lot of
work in learning to tune into your own
wants and needs and then communicate
them and if you err on the side of
extreme self-reliance you might need to
do some work around learning to listen
to other people's wants and needs and
incorporating those but the middle point
is that happy medium here right kindness
is not equivalent to being a doormat
it's not equivalent to erasing your
sense of self and it's not equivalent to
staying quiet about what you want and
need what people are describing when
they say all of those things is the fun
response so a quick kind of lexicon here
rule of thumb that I wrote down just to
keep things Crystal Clear before we go
into examples is that a fun response is
what happens when what we authentically
want is at odds with what another person
wants and we either dissociate from what
we want or are dishonest about what we
want in order to keep the peace or I
think kind of a subset of the fond
response could be that when we express
what we want we expect the other person
to caretake us so instead of being
assertive about what we want we go oh I
kind of want this I don't know I'm sorry
I'm sorry I'm sorry and apologize over
and over or something like that right
and in that case we're expecting the
other person to come make us feel better
about what we want so we're looking for
caretaking rather than taking
responsibility for what our wants and
needs are and then being inconsiderate
is when we are asserting our own wants
and needs without any care or
consideration or respect for how our
wants and needs impact other people so
this is one I imagine I've had to catch
myself on quite a bit in my own life I
learned early on that I am to speak up
and say what I want or else I'm not
going to get it and in many cases I
would take advantage of that when I was
in Social environments where I knew that
was not the norm so I would State
clearly and confidently what I wanted
and then if other people were seeming
kind of wishy-washy or uncomfortable I
would tell myself well it's their job to
say what they want if they want their
needs and wants acknowledged so if no
one's going to speak up I'm going to go
ahead and enforce what I want and that
was a way of evading responsibility for
the impact of my actions right now again
the middle ground which is kindness is
when we calmly and clearly and
assertively state what we want and also
make sure we're checking in and getting
a sense of what other people want and
then finding the balance between those
things or finding out how those things
can coexist so a couple of examples
let's say someone asks you for a favor
that you don't really want or have the
resources to do font response is to say
yes when you secretly want to say no and
to grow resentful as you complete the
favor because you knew the whole time
you didn't really want to take that on
or again it might be be a situation
where you say no but then you need them
to caretake you around it so you're
saying things like oh my God I'm so
sorry I don't have the time please don't
be mad at me don't be mad at me right
instead of saying hey that's actually
not something that I'm capable of taking
on here's what's going on for me right
now I totally hear that you're looking
for someone to help with that project
but unfortunately I'm not going to be
able to help you this time now the
inconsiderate response is to gleefully
turn down the request for help without
any consideration for let's say the
times that that person has helped you
out without recognizing that you have a
strong friendship or work relationship
and that there is a level of respect
that you need to show someone as you are
saying no to them if they have shown you
the same respect in the past or if
they've been willing and available to
help you out in similar situations so
fun response yes when you mean no
inconsiderate response gleefully saying
no with no respect to the underlying
relationship involved kind response
saying no and EXP blaming why you're
unable to take that on and showing some
care or compassion for the fact that
this person's in a bind and needs some
help maybe offering them the number of
someone who you think could help them or
just empathizing and going yeah I hear
you're in a tough spot there and I'm
really sorry that it's not something I
have the time for right now right you
can say no and still show a lot of care
and respect for the other person's
feelings another situation where I think
Fawn responses come up quite a bit is
when someone is mad at us so someone has
come to you and they have explained to
you that they're either uncomfortable
with something you did or that they're
mad at you for something you did the fun
response is usually to immediately
apologize don't think at all about why
you did that thing or what led you to do
that thing or what your side of the
situation was just tell them you're
sorry tell them you want to make it up
to them agree to any requests or demands
they have about what they want you to do
to make it up to them all of that is
usually a fun response if it's quick and
immediate like that right because
usually when it comes to actions that we
want to change or that we realize are
impacting someone else negatively
there's a period where we need some time
to think about it and figure out what a
better way to approach that situation
would be and so it's often kind of
inauthentic if we're moving immediately
into apologizing it's usually a fun
response now the flip side of this the
inconsiderate response kind of reminds
me of there's this concept called
emotional libertarianism that I've come
across a couple of times over the years
and the idea is that everyone is
completely responsible for their own
emotional reactions and nobody should do
anything at all to kind of caretake or
take responsibility for the way that
someone else is feeling and I think that
self-responsibility when it comes to
emotions is incredibly important so
being able to say I'm having this
response I own it as my own I'm not
saying that you caused my feelings right
but I'm sharing my feelings with you I
think that's healthy but the flip side
of this is someone comes to you and they
say you know know you hurt my feelings
something you did was painful for me and
your response is well you go deal with
it right I'm not going to think at all
about how my actions affect other people
I'm not going to help other people in
any way heal or move on from the ways
that I've hurt them I'm just going to
say you're feeling your responsibility
and be done with it that is the
inconsiderate response and the kind
response of course strikes that middle
ground between I'm hearing that I hurt
you and that I upset you here's what was
going on for me let's put our
competitive wants and needs on the table
that obviously led to this conflict and
let's figure it out together right
so it can be I'm sorry I hurt you and
also I have needs and wants that maybe
aren't being considered that is leading
to this conflict let's see where we can
find the middle ground once everyone's
wants and needs are on the table
and this goes back to that most classic
example on Earth where do you want to
eat for dinner right fawning is I want
to eat wherever you want to eat being
inconsiderate is I want to eat where I
want to eat and I don't care where you
want to eat but I need you to come with
me and the kind response is let's find a
compromise if it's important to both of
us that we eat dinner together so to
figure out if you are fawning or if you
are being kind ask yourself these
questions one am I aware of what my
needs and wants are in this situation if
this other person weren't present if
someone is asking you what do you want
to eat for dinner and you truly do just
want to eat whatever they want to eat
ask yourself if this person were gone
what would I eat for dinner and that's
your true underlying need or want next
question to ask yourself have I made my
wants and needs clear so have I told the
person I'm not that fussy about where we
want to eat for dinner but if you
weren't around I would probably eat
Indian food what are your thoughts right
now you've at least voiced what your
preferences are and sometimes it's
easier to think of it that way instead
of thinking of it as a need or a want
think of it as a preference and then
have I checked in and asked what the
other person wants or needs and this is
important to make sure you're not just
swinging the pendulum all the way to the
other end of the spectrum right and
going I want Indian let's go there that
might get you the dinner you want but
it's not going to be the most conducive
tool for having healthy reciprocal
long-term relationships right so it
depends what your goal is and I think
that sometimes people in this process do
need to distance themselves a little bit
when you are getting in touch with your
wants and your needs and your underlying
beliefs and thoughts and preferences in
the world after a lifetime of being
disconnected from them sometimes it does
help to take some time alone figure out
what those things are when no one else
is around impacting you and then you're
going to find it easier as you re-emerge
and re-engage in your social life to at
least have an idea of what those pref
references are even if you don't feel
super confident stating them right from
the get-go but the important part here
is to keep in mind it is not nice to not
make your wants and needs known if
anything that just creates these kind of
weird one-sided relationships where
other people are always trying to guess
at what you want and where they kind of
feel like the because they're
always calling the shots and this isn't
to shame you or say you're a bad person
for having a fawn response it's a
completely natural instinctual response
that comes up in situations where you
might not even be aware it's coming up
right but the thing to note is that it's
not you being too nice it's you fawning
the nice thing is to put your wants and
needs and preferences on the table
listen and seek out the wants needs and
preferences of other people and then
find a way to work together towards a
solution that satisfies both of you and
if the other person is unwilling to work
towards a solution with you then maybe
it's time to just go with your own needs
and part ways with that person right but
you're never going to know the answer to
that until you are making what you want
to need clear that is unquestionably the
nice thing to do
all right that's all I've got in me for
today on this particular topic but let
me know your thoughts feelings responses
to this video in the comments are you a
fauner are you someone who is only just
now coming into the realization that
that's what they've been doing or if
you've been aware of that patterning for
a while now I'm very curious about where
all of you guys are at with this so let
me know below and as always I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
foreign
[Music]