hey guys heidi preeb here happy new year
i hope everyone had an awesome holiday
season
i wanted to kick off the new year with
talking about something that has been on
my mind over the past couple of weeks
because it's a phrase that i get heard
repeated quite a bit in attachment
communities that i don't quite agree
with the logic behind and i'm going to
explain why so this phrase is the scarce
love hypothesis i don't know if that's
the exact wording that people always use
but it goes something like this when you
are insecurely attached you have this
incorrect belief that love is very
scarce so if you are anxious you might
feel like any time you get into a
relationship you will never find someone
else again who will love you as much as
that person loves you who will be
willing to put up with your behavior the
same way that person puts up with your
behavior or who will show up for you and
want to be committed to you in the same
way that that person is this also goes
for fearful avoidance for avoidant
personalities this might be a little bit
less overt in their consciousness so
they might not be able to put language
to it in the exact same way but it will
still be there so this idea of a scarce
love hypothesis and the idea that it's
incorrect
is something that i want to address in
this video so what do i mean by that
basically the way that this mindset is
often addressed in attachment
communities is by kind of implying that
everyone who thinks love is scarce is
incorrect so it is mistaken for you to
believe that there are very few options
for you out there to find love and that
you have to cling really tightly to this
one person that you're with because if
you leave no one else is ever going to
love you or care about you ever again
and for sure there is an element of
false thinking in here for most people
right i absolutely believe that
insecurely attached people are
underestimating their opportunities for
finding love in other relationships
but
there is also an element of truth i
believe to the scarce love hypothesis
and i'm going to unpack exactly what i
mean by that in this video so first of
all i want to translate this from
attachment jargon into what our thoughts
actually look like when we're having
thoughts around this so most of the time
we're not sitting there thinking i have
a scarce love hypothesis we are sitting
there thinking i'm not good enough right
especially if you are on the anxious
spectrum in any capacity so whether you
identify as anxious preoccupied or
fearful avoidant both are on the anxious
spectrum of attachment there can often
be this kind of pervasive permeating
feeling of i am not intelligent enough
beautiful enough attractive enough
enticing enough interesting enough rich
enough famous enough whatever it is you
are looking at yourself as though there
are these objective variables that you
have to measure up to and once you
measure up to those then you'll be
worthy of love and actually avoidance
also have this scale in their minds
again it just might be a little bit less
conscious for them than it is for those
on the anxious attachment spectrum who
think more consciously about their
attachment system so the way that we
consciously experience the scarce love
hypothesis might be something more like
us having thoughts like the following i
don't want to be with this person but i
don't think i'll be able to find anyone
else if i leave them this person is way
too good for me and so i have to do
everything i can within my power to make
sure that they don't notice that i'm not
good enough for them i don't deserve
healthy love so i need to find someone
equally as unhealthy as i am and then
make sure that we're stuck with each
other forever or any variation of any of
the above so the idea is that insecurely
attached people have this incorrect
inner monologue that love is scarce that
they are not going to be able to find
love elsewhere if they let go of the
love they had and that keeps them
trapped in these cycles of dysfunction
is that true sure yes often insecure
people do have that inner monologue and
it does keep them trapped in bad
situations however when it comes to
attachment healing i'm all about kind of
ungaslighting ourselves about these
things that we've been told that
we might kind of think about and go oh i
can get intellectually that that's
untrue but it doesn't feel true so we
might be able to grasp yes i'm sure
intellectually it's true that i might be
able to find someone else to love but it
doesn't feel true i feel very panicked
and like if i leave this relationship or
if i go out searching for love i'm not
going to find it and i want to talk
about where that feeling comes from
because it comes from a very real place
and i believe it is observing something
real yes absolutely there is probably
much more love and many more
opportunities for love out there than
you perceive there to be however when
you're insecurely attached it is also
true that love is not as abundant for
you as it is for people who have better
relating skills okay so there is a very
real barrier in the way of you finding
and maintaining healthy love that is not
there for secure people and that
deserves acknowledgement because we have
to learn how to work against that
barrier and overcome it if we want to
start forming healthy long-lasting
relationships that we don't feel like
we're stuck in but that we feel like we
are genuinely happily choosing and
walking freely into so if your feelings
are telling you if i leave this person
i'm never gonna find someone better i
would challenge the word better and i
would invite you to look at the way that
you're evaluating people because people
are not better or worse people
objectively there are just people who
you are more or less compatible with but
i think it's very accurate to say i
would not be compatible with a healthier
person than this
i would not necessarily
have the skills to relate to someone who
actually knew how to have healthy
communication and healthy relationships
right that is probably a true thing to
say so if we're looking at better as a
measure of communication skills and
ability to engage healthily in
relationships that is genuinely an area
where you might need to do some work
before healthy love will become
abundantly available to you now
obviously this does not mean that you
don't deserve to be loved every single
human being who exists on the planet has
inherent worth intrinsic value i believe
that from the top of my head to the tips
of my toes you existing is reason enough
for you to be valued and loved by people
however engaging in an interdependent
committed romantic relationship is
different than just being loved right it
is a partnership that you require skills
to navigate effectively so i kind of
think about it like this when we say
love is abundant and that you are
perceiving it as scarce
that's not entirely true in much the
same way as let's say you went to a
cafeteria and there was a person who was
pouring from a giant bowl of soup and
there was enough soup in this bowl for
everyone in the cafeteria to eat like
eight bowls of soup right the soup is
abundant but if you don't have a bowl to
catch the soup in when the person spoons
it out to you it's not as accessible to
you as it is to other people right
everyone else might be walking up and
getting their bowl filled up and then
sitting down and spooning it into their
mouths to eat but for you your options
are kind of like go up there stick your
head under the ladle and hope that you
get a little bit of soup in your mouth
or hope that somebody comes up to you
and is willing to share their soup with
you knowing that you can't really give
them the same thing in return the soup
is healthy love okay you get what i'm
saying and so this would kind of be the
problem for an anxious or a fearful
avoidant person it's not that love is
not abundant and available out there in
the world it's that they didn't really
develop the skills early on for learning
to healthily take in love they don't
have a bowl to keep the love in so they
would always be kind of overly dependent
on a healthy partner until they find a
way to get a bowl themselves and
following the same metaphor with an
avoidant person it would be kind of like
if at a very young age the avoidant
person had eaten a bowl of soup that was
poisoned and so now they have a food
aversion to soup so they have the bowl
they can put the soup in the bowl but
then they sit down to eat it and they're
like i don't know if this soup is safe
or not and they might have an aversion
to putting it in their mouth so in both
cases it's not that the soup is not
there and it's not that the person
spooning out the soup is any less
willing to give it to them than they are
to anyone else it's that in both cases
there is a problem with their ability to
take in the soup in the same way that
other people take it in and so after a
while it would start to get really
frustrating for you in this situation if
someone kept telling you soup is just as
available to you as it is to anyone else
there's just mental barriers in the way
of you and soup no in some cases you
actually have either trauma responses in
the way in the case of the avoidant who
feels like they're afraid of the suit
but don't understand why or for the
anxious spectrum types there are real
skills that they need to learn to be
able to receive soup or love properly
and it gets kind of annoying to just be
continuously told it's all in your head
right yes it's kind of all in your head
because attachment stuff is all in your
brain it's stored in your neurology in
the way that your synapses fire but it's
not that you're crazy in believing that
love is more difficult for you or more
difficult to access for you than it is
for secure people you are right there
there are barriers in the way that are
different for you than for other people
and that's worth noting when you're
insecurely attached whether that's
anxious avoidant or fearful avoidant or
anything in between you are dealing with
old wounds that come up and color new
situations for you in a way that secure
people are not necessarily dealing with
so you might perceive other people in
the world around you to be unreliable
and threatening and that very thought
gets in the way of you forming healthy
relationships because you struggle with
trust you struggle with connecting
authentically and you struggle with
either being overly dependent or not
dependent enough in partnerships
learning to not let past wounds and
traumas color your current experience of
relationships is a long process it tends
to require professional help learning to
recognize what's healthy and what's
unhealthy in relationships what's a red
flag versus what's a green one is a long
process that often requires professional
help and a long healing journey in this
metaphor if everyone has their own bowl
of soup that bowl of soup is self-love
right so the secure person has it and
they can share some of their self-love
with you but if you don't have any of
your own if you don't have a bowl to
hold yourself love within you're not
going to have that much to give back to
someone else because really that's what
a healthy relationship is it's two
people sharing the wonderful healthy
resources that they've accumulated
emotionally with each other so if you
are insecurely attached one of the tools
you really need to work on to be able to
access healthy love is developing a
healthy relationship with yourself i
have a video on this if you're kind of
stuck on where to start that i'll link
in the description and if you're
avoidant or if you're not anxious and
fearful avoidant deal with this as well
your other job is to learn to recognize
the signs of poisoned versus not
poisoned soup right because if you're
constantly paranoid about the love that
you're taking in and you're not sure is
this healthy or unhealthy is it going to
turn on a dime or is it not that's
really going to get in the way of you
forming trusting mutually beneficial
connections you have to learn to spot
red flags versus green flags so the
specifics of what each type needs to do
to heal will be different for each
attachment style but also for each
individual person because all of us have
slightly different wounds slightly
different things that we've internalized
about relationships the styles
themselves are just kind of overall
patterns but you are a unique human
being who has been through a unique set
of experiences and who has internalized
a very specific worldview as a result so
you need to be doing independent work on
yourself to figure out where your
triggers are where your wounds are that
are coloring your understanding of the
world where your biases and challenges
are and which skills you don't have that
would allow healthy love to become more
abundantly available for you we need to
get you a bowl and we need to help you
to trust what's inside of the bowl so
that someday you can share your soup
with someone else and someone can share
your soup with you this is kind of a
gross example like it's 20 22. there's
kovit everywhere probably don't go
around sharing soups with people on
first dates but you get what i'm going
for but i want to wrap this all back up
by saying this idea that you can get
love that you can find love outside of
the relationship that you want to leave
or whatever it is if you get better is
true but what you perceive as better is
probably false if you think that being
better means being fitter or richer or
more interesting i almost guarantee you
those things are not the things that are
preventing you from finding healthy love
they might be the things preventing you
from finding unhealthy love right
unhealthy people are all operating on
that scale of how do i find someone who
just meets my kind of surface level
requirements
but even if you find a way to excel at
all of those things you're still only
going to meet other people who value
those things and don't know how to have
deep connections when we connect really
deeply human to human with someone else
it requires a sense of vulnerability of
being able to share ourselves without
getting completely disregulated and
putting our emotions on the other person
right that's a skill that needs to be
learned to have healthy love when we
love people healthily we're able to hold
space for them and all of their
complexity and all of their nuances even
the ones that threaten us a little bit
without getting completely disregulated
that's a skill that requires a lot of
work if you're insecurely attached so
yes you might need to do some
self-improvement but the
self-improvement is not the kind of
self-improvement that you're thinking of
it is not getting objectively better it
is getting better at relationship
building because healthy people care
about what's inside of your heart and
your mind much more than they care about
what's inside of your body or your bank
account and yes there will always be
compatibility at play we will always for
the most part want people who share
similar values to us and similar
lifestyles but beyond that it's really a
matter of can you connect deeply with
someone so if healthy love does not feel
abundant to you you're not crazy it
probably isn't you probably don't have
the skills for finding it so your job
your mission as a person who is now
aware of their attachment style and the
problems that come along with it is to
start working towards healthy
relationship building skills that will
get you on the pathway to being able to
easily connect with other people who
know how to have healthy long lasting
connections okay that is all i have for
today on the scarce love hypothesis let
me know your thoughts about this in the
comments what are some limiting beliefs
about love that you guys have what are
some false beliefs about finding love
that you have and which better beliefs
are you forming and which ways are you
working towards actualizing those
beliefs as you move through your
attachment healing journey i'm always
curious let me know below and i will see
you guys back here again soon
[Music]
you