hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here this month on this
channel we've been talking about
intimacy so how to develop and maintain
healthy intimate connections with anyone
from friends to Partners to parents to
siblings anyone we just want to
experience more authentic connection
with and today what I want to talk about
is the difference between how securely
attached people form and maintain
intimate con ctions versus insecurely
attached people and there is a key
ingredient to this process that is very
important that we often haven't learned
if we are insecurely attached and what
that ingredient is is
Attunement so Attunement is essentially
the process of being engaged in this
kind of energetic dance with another
person so being really present with each
other in a way that allows each person
to learn the others intricacies and kind
of play with their energy in a very
natural way so this is about essentially
being in an interpersonal flow with
someone when we are securely attached
when we have a parent who is deeply
attuned to us from a young age we learn
what it feels like to have that type of
attention and empathy focused on us so
we learn naturally and instinctively to
approach Making Connections the same way
as we grow up however when we air
insecurely attached often the way we
learn to relate to other people did not
involve a lot of Attunement so this is a
skill that we need to learn as we go
through our lives in order to get to a
place where our intimate connections are
functioning as healthfully as they
possibly can so what we're going to go
over today is what happens in the case
of two different people growing up one
of of whom has an attuned caregiver and
one who does not so one who has either a
Mis attuned caregiver or an
intermittently attuned caregiver so a
parent who was able to be present and to
read you quite accurately but that
presence was inconsistent and which
blind spots might develop for the person
who didn't have that Attunement as well
as which compensatory strategies you may
have developed if you grew up insecurely
attached that you now think are the key
to developing intimate
but that actually are kind of serving to
keep other people at arms length
unintentionally in your life then we're
going to talk about what it takes to
learn the skill of Attunement so how we
can get better at practicing this in
order to start building some really
fundamental intimacy skills so to start
us off I want to talk about what
Attunement looks like in infancy when
you have a parent who is really attuned
to their child what you have is a parent
who is generally able to reflect the
child back to themselves reasonably well
so the child gets a little distressed
and the parent is able to communicate
using body language because children at
that age do not have language skills yet
that they understand their distress that
they see it and also that they're able
to contain it in some way so they're
able to sooe the child in a way that
makes the child feel as though there is
someone competent who understands them
and is available to help them
and so this is the process of a parent
being very present with a child I don't
know if you've ever gone and been around
a parent who has like a six-month-old
baby and the baby can have these very
specific noises or coups or little
movements they do and the parent is able
to interpret them incredibly accurately
so they might know what their child
sounds like when their distress is due
to having a wet diaper versus being
hungry versus being tired and they're
able to tune in into these little
nuances that give them information about
that child's inner world so this is
often what we get in a secure caregiving
Dynamic we get a parent who is
sensitized to their child's specific
needs and the child learns in that
process that if I show my emotions in a
congruent way so if I simply display
what is happening for me those emotions
are going to get reflected back to me
and someone is going to be present with
me and that presence is going to lead to
a deep form of connection and then as
that child grows up without ever putting
it into conscious words what they're
going to do is mimic that strategy when
they're meeting and trying to form
connections with other people so they're
going to do exactly what their caregiver
did with them and they're going to be
present with people when they're meeting
them they're going to ask questions
about people they're going to be curious
about them and they're really going to
be centered in the moment moment with
what is happening and for the most part
secure children are going to treat
everybody they meet like a blank slate
so they're not going to be trying to fit
people into all of these different boxes
and kind of crack the code on who they
are as soon as they get in touch with
them they're just going to sit with
people and notice what emerges inside of
the dynamic and what's unique to every
friendship or every relationship they
enter into because again this was what
they experienced growing up they
experienced a caregiver who was curious
about them interested in their nuances
and not projecting any particular way of
being onto them so secure children who
had attuned caregivers learn to approach
connection through the lens of presence
and
curiosity and this is in somewhat stark
contrast to those who were raised
insecurely attached when you are raised
by a non-attuned caregiver and this does
not mean a caregiver who is malicious or
who doesn't want to give you love and
support it could look like a caregiver
who is working two jobs and doesn't have
enough time to stay consistently attuned
to their child it might look like a
caregiver who has their own mental
health challenges or attachment issues
and who is doing their best to pass on a
secure form of love to their child but
is unaware of where they have their own
blind spots but whatever the case may be
if you had a caregiver who is only
sometimes able to reflect you back to
yourself properly or who fairly
consistently missed the mark on what
your feelings and needs are in some
major way or maybe a caregiver who
really struggled to be present
themselves so even when they were with
you they weren't really fully with you
their mind was always kind of somewhere
else in all of these cases it's likely
that you're not going to really learn
what it feels like to be attuned to
another person so to do that present
moment give and take where you're just
exchanging information on a sematic
level about what it's like to be each
other in that moment and so you're going
to have to develop a different strategy
for maintaining connection because all
of us need to stay in connection with
our caregivers it is a survival response
to be able to do that to be able to get
and keep their attention to make sure
that our needs will get met so if the
option of presence and curiosity is not
available to you from a young age
because your parent is not present with
or curious about you in a consistent way
you learn that to connect with that
parent you have to develop some sort of
strategy and this is not a conscious
strategy so this is not something your
mind is working on in words when you're
an infant the strategy that we develop
arises from first inside of our bodies
so let's say you learn as an infant that
if you express an extreme level of
distress you get met with a kind of
disgust response from your caregiver or
they suddenly seem dissociated and
distant your body is going to naturally
start repressing extreme distress when
it comes up because you need to not show
it in order to stay in connection with
your caregiver so you now have a sematic
strategy online it is not one you
consciously chose it is one your body
chose for you or let's say your parent
only responds to you if you are in
extreme distress now your sematic
strategy is going to be for your body to
start amplifying any feelings that you
have of pain or discomfort in order to
ensure that you probably get your
caregivers attention so your body
develops these sematic strategies for
keeping you in connection the belief
that secure people have that if I simply
show my emotions exactly as they are at
the exact volume that they're happening
I will receive appropriate care and
support is not the same story that your
body has internalized as true and as you
grow up you're going to naturally
default to using strategy and Analysis
as your main connecting tools because
you're going to have that belief deep in
your bones that connection does not
happen through being present and curious
and allowing everyone to just relax and
be who they are you believe on a core
sematic level I have to in some way
change my experience of who I am in
order to form connection with other
people and the best way to do that as we
get older and our brains start
developing is often to start analyzing
other people very consciously and trying
to figure out before we're even present
in connection with them how is this
other person operating what kind of a
person do I think of them as what type
of person might they like a go what type
of a person should I present myself as
in order to get in connection with this
other person and the approach will be
different depending on if you air
anxious or air avoidant if you a
avoidant that script might look like how
do I become completely self-sufficient
so that people perceive me as someone
who is competent and airgo worthwhile if
you air more anxious it might be about
determining what other people like and
then trying to mold or shape your
personality to fit that in some way to
get that approval but in any case you're
going to already have a very different
strategy for forming connections than
those who are raised securely attached
so when we are analyzing people it often
might feel like we're being curious
about them because we might be really
focused on them when what we're actually
doing is trying to fit them into all
these different types of boxes in our
brain so growing up as someone who had
fearful avoidant patterning I got
extremely into personality theory for a
number of years I have a whole past
career that is based solely around
analyzing different models of
personality so that I could fit
everybody I met into the absolute most
perfect box in my brain if I could just
kind of understand where they fit on all
of these axes and then put together a
perfect image of who I believe that
person was to me that felt like
Attunement because I was really attuned
to the image of this person that I had
inside of my brain however when I was
actually present with people in the
moment I was only ever really half there
and the other half of me was busy
measuring everything they were saying up
against all of these mental models I had
in my brain that were trying to
calculate exactly what type of a person
this was exactly what their motivations
and drives might be
and how they were most likely going to
show up in the future based on all of
those boxes that I was putting them into
and for you it might not be personality
theory it might be that you are
constantly trying to assess whether
someone is a good person or a bad person
or a competent person or an incompetent
person or whatever other models of
understanding people you have learned to
cling to as a safety net but the
important thing to note here is that
whenever we are doing that what we are
not doing is being in the present moment
taking someone in exactly as they are
every single person on the planet has a
completely unique experience nobody is
going to fit cleanly into the categories
of one specific attachment style
personality type level of development
whatever it is if we want to actually
get to know people we need to be willing
to put all of that down and simply
attune to the real person in front front
of us in the present moment now of
course this is harder than it sounds I
did make an entire video on this that I
will link in the description of this
video that's just around staying present
with people and building intimacy out of
the present moment but before we talk
more about how to do that we're going to
go into what happens after this phase so
when we are secure versus insecure and
we manage to form connections with
someone what strategies are now going to
be online for each of those people as
they aim to deepen their connections
inside of
relationships I do want to note the
irony here of making a video that is all
about not putting people into boxes and
using two very clear archetypes of
secure and insecure to put people into
boxes but for educational purposes
there's not really another way of going
about this just couldn't go on without
acknowledging the irony so when we have
those skills Online for being present
with people and curious about them what
we naturally develop as we grow up is a
good sense of
differentiation differentiation is just
a fancy psychological word that means
the ability to have a healthy balance
between intimacy and autonomy so a well
differentiated person is someone who's
pretty clear on who they are as well as
how other people are different from them
and so they're able to mentalize well
for other people mentalization another
unnecessarily fancy psychology word
simply means the ability to have a
pretty good idea of what other people
are thinking so when we're imagining
what it's like to be somebody else if
we're mentalizing for them well it means
we're probably not experiencing a whole
bunch of biases that are in the way of
understanding another person clearly
when we are well differentiated and able
to mentalize well for the people in our
lives generally it means that we're
really good at being adaptive in our
approach to relationships because if I
have a clear idea of who I am where my
boundaries lie what I need out of a
relationship and what I have to offer
and I'm able to be pretty clear on who
other people are and what their wants
and needs are and what they have to
offer and what they want to receive it's
not that hard to find a lot of healthy
compromises inside of our relationships
to other people because we have a pretty
uncomplicated view of what all the
moving pieces are and what we are and
are not willing to do to make a given
relationship work we're not expecting
every relationship we have to look the
same or to follow the same rules we're
able to kind of tune into our bodies and
go okay here's what I like and don't
like inside of this relationship here's
what feels good versus here's what feels
bad and we can make decisions about each
relationship
accordingly now to contrast this let's
go back to that other person who grew up
without that attuned caregiver when we
receive an inadequate amount of feedback
on our inner worlds so when we receive
either incorrect feedback our parent is
not able to properly understand what
we're thinking or feeling and reflect it
back to us or they're uninterested or
incapable of doing so in a consistent
way what happens is that we're kind of
left alone to make sense of our own
inner world and so we might get pretty
good as we grow up at consciously
understanding why we're doing everything
we're doing but we might be missing
information about how other people are
operating differently and so when we're
trying to inter people's behavior we're
often going to be unconsciously
projecting onto them what we would be
thinking or what we would be feeling if
we said or did what they said or did
instead of being able to differentiate
clearly and understand that we are very
separate from them now if you a avoidant
this might not sound too familiar to you
you might be thinking well I'm extremely
aware that everybody's separate from me
and that they're saying and doing things
for their own reasons and and where your
blind spot might be in this process is
actually that you are in fact
influencing your relationship with
someone and if they are upset or if
there is something they are struggling
with inside of the relationship it might
not be just a them issue it might be
something that you need to work out
interpersonally being good at
differentiation means knowing where you
end and someone else begins but it also
means being able to understand how the
two of you influence each each other
which tends to be where the avoidant has
that blind spot if you are not aware of
how people are impacting you you're also
going to assume that other people are
always functioning inside of a kind of
psychological Silo when in fact our
relational world is impacting all of us
all of the time it's just about being
able to cleanly understand what's me
what's someone else and what is the
dynamic interplay between the two of us
now because you don't necessarily have
that ability to differentiate clearly
when you grow up insecurely attached
what's likely to happen in instances of
conflict is you're going to become rigid
in your approach and this is super
important to note that rigidity is
actually highly adaptive for you before
you learn something else so if you're
not getting enough feedback from your
caregiver when you're young about what
you need to do in order to stay in close
connection with them if you find
anything that works about 70% of the
time it is absolutely going to be in
your best interests to apply that method
100% of the time because it means that
at least 70% of the time you're going to
be able to stay in connection and the
same is true of how we approach intimacy
and relationships as we grow up if we
have that insecure patterning you might
learn that certain things you do certain
parts of that strategy you adapted from
a young age work enough of the time but
the other 30% of the time might be
causing really big problems for you the
problem is that if we are not super
presentent inside of our relationships
and if we are only navigating and
approaching relationships based on our
best guesses and the best analyses that
are available to us it means we're not
collecting a lot of raw data about what
is unique to that relationship what
might work inside of this relationship
that didn't work in my last one or vice
versa what might not work inside of this
relationship even though it did work
really well in my last one and so we can
get really rigid and hyperfixated when
we're insecurely attached on the way
that we think a relationship should go
or the way that we think a relationship
should look instead of actually getting
present with ourselves elves and our
partner and the relationship as it is
and attending to that so instead of
slowing down and unpacking and really
hearing each other out on one another's
perspectives especially around where a
certain problem is happening we're
likely if we are insecurely attached to
go very quickly to what we think the
other person should do or how we think
things should go and cling to dear life
to that thing that has saved us 70% of
the time so what we're going to move our
Focus to now is how to start shifting
these relational strategies so if we
grew up learning that the way to form
connections was through strategy and
Analysis how do we start shifting into a
place where we're connecting based on
presence and curiosity instead and then
if we learned projection and rigidity as
strategies for maintaining relationships
with people people how do we start
moving that into a space where we're
instead tuning into differentiation so
understanding the unique needs of the
relationship and adaptation so being
flexible in our approach and allowing
ourselves to give each relationship
whatever that unique relationship needs
and of course if the unique relationship
needs are something we don't like then
we also have the flexibility and freedom
to walk away from it so the kind of key
players in the game of moving from
strategy and Analysis to presence and
connection are one checking ourselves
for congruence and working on our
ability to stay authentic inside of our
connections and this is going to work
best inside of our connections with
other securely attached people so
checking ourselves for how we're
communicating when someone asks me how I
am am I answering with the true answer
in a contained way or am I just
defaulting to things like I'm fine when
I'm upset with someone am I
communicating that to them directly and
letting them know what my underlying
need is or am I getting passive
aggressive and telling them of course
I'm not mad when it's very clearly to
them and anybody else watching my body
language that my body is telling a
different story The more we can work on
developing emotional congruence so
showing up and being honest about what's
actually going on for us the more we're
allowed ing other people the opportunity
to attune to us and to get into that
state of interpersonal flow with us
because if we are obscuring our true
feelings and thoughts and motivations
from people but we're trying to form an
intimate connection with them it's kind
of like trying to dance a duet where
your partner has absolutely no idea what
dance moves you're planning to bust out
when they're not going to be able to
sync up with you because you are not
being transparent about the way in which
you're trying to move alongside them so
this needs to become a practice when
we're forming connections with other
people can we catch ourselves in the
moments where we're inclined to be
dishonest or inclined to gloss over the
truth because our bodies are screaming
at us that that's the only reasonable
thing to do can we challenge ourselves
to be 10% more honest and congruent in
our interactions and then 20% and then
30% until eventually we're showing up
more authentically most of the time this
is going to go a really long way in
other people being able to attune to you
and when other people can attune to you
now you're going to start getting that
type of feedback from people that you
didn't get when you were young you're
going to be able to start seeing
yourself reflected back to yourself more
clearly through the secure connections
that you form and so you're going to
start developing a kind of taste for
what having that form of empathy and
connectedness looks and feels like when
it's directed at you and then you start
developing the opportunity to do the
same in response and to learn nothing
terrible is going to happen if I go into
an instance of speaking with someone
without all of these scripts operating
in the back of my mind I can just show
up be present with someone be mindful of
the fact that I am going to have those
scripts going through my mind but choose
not to consciously focus on them when
I'm with someone so just notice when I
have something coming up in the back of
my mind that's either trying to fit this
person into a category or tell myself a
story about who they are as a person or
getting distracted by scripts that are
saying things like oh my God what does
that movement that they just made with
their face mean do they hate me are they
judging me are they going to go home and
gossip to everybody about me slowing
down our process and learning to just be
with people in the moment stay mindful
of what's coming up but don't get
attached to it and just notice that in
every interaction you have that is a
little bit awkward or a little bit
uncomfortable because you aren't
covering things up with fake niceties or
half dissociating into your own mind you
still survive those
interactions this is a skill that gets
built slowly the skill of learning to be
present with other people and you're
going to find that the more you're able
to practice this skill the more wide
ranging your curiosity about them is
going to become because you're not
instantly putting them into all these
different categories in your mind and
deciding that there's nothing more you
need to know about them because you've
decided you've got them figured out and
now you're relating mostly to this image
you have of them inside of your mind
rather than the person in front of you
the more we get in tune with the people
in front of us and we listen to them and
we ask them open-ended questions the
more we start to develop a new and
complex idea of who that person is that
is actually completely accurate to them
because it's based on feedback they have
given us now of course people are not
always going to give us perfectly honest
and direct feedback about themselves but
this is still going to get us a lot
closer to the mark of who somebody is
than trying to fit them into all of
these categories in our brain is at
least when it comes to developing deep
intimacy with someone that's when those
nuances to really
matter but staying present in this way
also requires us to kind of drop our
attachment to outcome when we go into
new situations so often we're going to
be going into an interaction with some
form of Hope about how it goes but when
we have those scripts running in the
back of our mind that are based around
hoping someone likes us or hoping they
give us some specific type of feedback
or hoping the interaction goes in some
specific Direction what we're not doing
is once again staying present what we're
doing is trying to drive the
conversation towards a particular
outcome so to really get good at
practicing this skill it's also
important to make sure that in all of
our interactions with people as much as
humanly possible we are dropping our
attachment to outcome we are letting go
of the things that we wish they would
say or do or the script we invented for
them inside of our own minds that we
want them to say and we're actually
getting curious in an authentic way
about what they are saying and how they
are showing up and the information they
are disclosing to us about themselves
again we're going to learn way more that
way way faster and then there's those
final hurdles of getting close to
someone and instead of defaulting to
projection so deciding that we know what
they're thinking or feeling and rigidity
so deciding that there is a specific way
every relationship should be and we know
what that way is how do we move that to
a place where we're instead relying on
differentiation and adaptation to keep
the people we're close to close this is
going to require doing a lot of
self-awareness work so figuring out
where am I kind of blocked from
understanding myself properly and in
what ways might I be projecting onto
other people rather than owning and
sitting with what my feelings are again
differentiation requires a deep
understanding of what's me and what is
someone else we are all our own unique
ecosystems and we need to understand as
clearly as possible how does my
ecosystem function in order to be
present enough with another person to
notice differences in their ecosystem
when they arise without feeling
threatened by those
differences so the more we increase our
self-awareness and work on identifying
our blind spots which is often going to
take the help of the people around us
the more we start to naturally sensitize
ourselves to our social
environments and when I use the word
sensitive here I don't mean this in the
sense of hyper sensitivity I'm not
talking about making yourself into
someone who is overly defensive what I'm
talking about is sensitivity in the true
sense of the word so literally being in
our senses tuned into exactly what is
happening in reality in a given moment
and being able to notice in that moment
how am I feeling how is this experience
of reality impacting me on a
physiological level and also what's
happening for this person in front of me
in reality in this moment what changes
am I noticing in their energy or the way
that they're approaching our
conversation as it goes on this is the
art of Attunement just like to dance
well with a partner you have to be
present in your body and noticing and
attuned to the slight changes that
they're making in theirs the same is
true when it comes to developing
intimacy with somebody the more we can
stay present sensitive to our
environments and engaged with the other
person the better we're going to get at
making intuitive adaptations that allow
our relationships to function more
smoothly you usually the really big
fights that we see between couples who
are insecurely attached come about
because both of them are regulating much
more with the ideas they have of each
other and of how a relationship should
be inside of their own minds than they
are with each other in reality when we
are truly attuned to another person when
we have learned to stay present with
them and really notice what it's like to
be with them and how we interact with
one another it's pretty hard for huge
chasms of understanding to develop
between two people because you're going
to catch them much much sooner when
you're consistently in the present
moment with
somebody and the thing is this takes a
ton of practice precisely because when
we are young being present is often a
very threatening thing to us if we air
insecurely attached the reason it's
threatening is because our bodies are
going to be screaming hey work harder on
your strategy for figuring out how to
get your needs met so that you don't get
abandoned this being in the present
moment thing is not that important and
doesn't have much to offer us and a big
part of this process is going to be
sitting down and spending time with that
self-protective part of us and letting
it know hey I have a different way now
of getting those same needs met I'm not
leaving you out in a lurt here and so
like any significant change this is
going to happen slowly in a series of
different moments where we practice over
and over again these new skills but like
most things we do when we are earning
secure attachment this only makes our
lives better and richer and more
fulfilling the more we practice it so
there's a lot of gold to be minded along
the way all right that's all I have to
say for today on developing the skill of
Attunement inside of intimate
relationships as always let me know any
questions comments thoughts you have as
you go through this video I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really
[Music]
soon