hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about integrity and a lot of what
integrity means is being able to own
what we are contributing to our
relationship Dynamics for better and
also for worse and so something that I
feel like is really common which I want
to focus a lot of attention on this week
in particular is the dynamic that crops
up between anxious avoidant couples
where each person ends up looking at the
other after a series of conflicts in the
relationship and thinking very
convincingly to themselves the other
person is 100% of the problem and so
what we're doing with this series is
highlighting some of the issues that you
might be bringing into a dynamic like
this that you aren't noticing yourself
bringing in because they are emanating
from a blind spot so without further Ado
we're going to get into five blind spots
that are pretty common For Those Who air
aoid on the attachment Spectrum the
first blind spot is what I call the
hostility blind spot if you have an
avoidant attachment style what that
means in part is that very early on in
life when you expressed emotional needs
or vulnerability you were predictably
met with hostility from your
caregivers now this does not mean that
your caregivers were necessarily
malicious or meant any sort of harm
towards you it could be that but it
could also just be that they eles were
not particularly comfortable with their
own vulnerability and so they didn't
know how to mirror yours back to you so
what you learned to do was adapt to a
slightly more hostile than average
emotional environment and you learned to
do that in a couple of ways one was you
learn to suppress a lot of your more
vulnerable feelings so that they never
even came into your awareness in the
first place so that there is no risk of
you expressing them and getting rejected
but another mechanism that we often
develop in these environments is is just
starting to kind of tune out on a low
level things like hostility being
directed at us and so as we grow up it
feels like we're more resilient to this
than the average person like we might
have this sense that it's just not that
important to me what other people think
of me or other people's judgments just
kind of roll off of me to an extent but
what we aren't realizing is that this is
an adaptation and that other people do
not have the same adaptation as us
and so when we are in more kind of tough
love hostile environments we might
actually Thrive but for other people
those environments are very
painful and I find that on average
avoidantly attached people are not super
aware of when they are giving off
hostile Vibes so when their body
language or their tone is communicating
contempt and
hostility and the problem is that
especially if you have a partner who
airs anxiously at attached they are
hyper sensitive to tones of hostility
and contempt and to be clear securely
attached people are also very sensitive
to this they just have a little bit more
self- protection in place so they're
more likely to back off when they feel
these Vibes than they are to get
disregulated and ask for you to regulate
them but what I really encourage you to
check in on if you have an avoidant
attachment style and you find yourself
in a lot of conflict heavy
relationships is are you aware of how
you come off on a physical and emotional
level in these conflicts so what I
generally find is that one of the big
reasons why avoidance tend to think I am
not contributing anything to this
Dynamic that is messing it up and it's
my partner's irrationality that needs to
be check is because they are dissociated
from The Vibes that they are giving off
in their relationship and often those
vibes are quite contemptuous and quite
hostile and their partner who might seem
to be overreacting out of nowhere is
actually reacting to that energy not
just and in a lot of cases not at all to
the words that you are actually saying
so as silly as this sounds if you really
want to work on this something you could
try doing is videotaping the next time
you get into a conflict obviously with
the other person's consent and then
watching that video back with the sound
off and asking yourself what emotions
would I feel like this person was giving
off if all I were paying attention to
was their body language same goes for
sitting in front of a mirror in an
argument it's just probably going to
take you out of the experience a little
bit more but looking just at your
physiology and your facial expressions
ask yourself what vibe am I giving off
here and how might someone who is
sensitive to contempt or criticism or
hostility be responding to that kind of
vibe and that might give you a lot of
information on where your partner's
perceived irrationality is coming from
or they're getting really disregulated
in a way that you don't understand
because you can't see anything wrong
with what you're saying again checking
in on that body language and on how
you're coming across not just what you
are saying might get you a long way
towards understanding what they are
reacting to including in circumstances
where they are not even conscious of the
fact that that's what they're reacting
to Second blind spot I encourage you to
check in on if you are avoidantly
attached is what I call the proximity
seeking blind spot so a big part of what
helps us form attachment relationships
is people's desire to stay in contact
with each other and to pursue each other
right to go out of their way to make
each other feel wanted to set out dates
to find times to get together and very
often if we air avoidant we have a
tendency to want the other person to
kind of fit themselves into our lives as
opposed to doing that proximity seeking
ourselves and going out and trying to
fit ourselves into somebody else's life
in equal measure and the reason this is
a blind spot is because it ends up
heavily contributing to which types of
Partners you attract so kind of rule of
thumb I like to defer to here is that as
guarded as you are is as unbounded of a
person you are likely to
attract right because if you're giving
off a lot of signals that you don't
necessarily have a lot of time to give
to somebody you don't want to take a lot
of initiative on figuring out how you
can fit into their lives what a secure
person is going to do when they look at
that is go okay never mind you don't
seem to have the space for me in your
life so maybe we'll just be friends or I
won't pursue dating you or something
like that but someone who feels like
their selfworth is hinged upon getting
you to like them is going to be very
willing to step over their own
boundaries to gain your
approval but that means that you are
necessarily attracting someone who is
not particularly boundar and that is
generally going to make a lot of
conflict pretty challenging to repair so
you need to make sure that you are doing
enough of the proximity seeking enough
of the flexibility enough of the
rearranging your schedule and your
lifestyle to accommodate the other
person as they are doing for you and
this is how we start achieving true
balance in relationships and start
finding people to have relationships
with who are balanced in return but we
can't have it both ways we cannot have
someone who molds entirely around our
lives and what works for us and also
expect to have a relationship that is
equal between two people who are showing
up as their adult selves we either have
to put in an equal amount of work or we
have to accept that the dynamic is
probably not going to be a particularly
healthy one and something that I want to
point out here is that you might not be
aware of the extent to which you are
distanced or not compromising in your
relationships so this might need to be
something that you start drawing some
conscious attention to and going okay
for every date my partner plans how many
dates am I planning for every night they
stay at my place how many nights am I
staying at their place how much personal
information am I disclosing to them
relative to how much they're disclosing
to me how often am I going to them for
support and co-regulation relative to
how many times they are coming to me for
support and
co-regulation and if there's a really
big imbalance in that area that might be
a little bit of a yellow flag to just
draw your attention to the fact that you
might not be doing enough of that
vulnerability and that proximity seeking
inside of the relationship to attract a
healthy partner blind spot number three
is the you are not okay blind spot so
avoidant patterning is to have this
internalized worldview that I am okay
I'm good I can take care of myself and
regulate my own emotions but other
people are generally not okay especially
people who I am attached to they need me
to give to them and they need me to help
them become okay
and so often we can be in the dating
stages with someone and find them to be
quite competent and quite capable of
taking care of themselves but then once
we become attached or once our
attachment triggers come online we flip
back into that worldview of believing
that we are competent and the other
person is not and the problem with this
is that it gets really difficult to
resolve ongoing conflicts if we believe
the other person to be
incompetent because we won't even give
them a fair shot at resolution we will
assume that we have to figure out the
entire problem on our own and then
present them with the solution as
opposed to tuning into where we feel
vulnerable or what we're uncertain about
and then being willing to bring those
things into the dynamic as unfinished
products hear out from our partner
what's going on for them and then work
together to find solutions that we could
not have found if we each kept our side
of things only to ourselves so the first
person I got into a relationship with
when I was in a more secure place in my
life was someone who aired a bit
avoidant and after our first argument
this person went away and wrote me this
extremely long letter laying out all of
the things they were struggling with
inside of the relationship and the
reasons why they believed they had to
take a huge step back from the
relationship and they handed me this
letter and I read it and just looked at
them and went well why don't we just
talk about this why don't we just figure
out how to make more room for these
things and inside of the relationship so
that we both feel comfortable and then
kind of find a new equilibrium or
balance that works for us both and first
they looked at me like I was speaking
Mandarin but then we did exactly that
and things went beautifully back to a
new normal but this is very often a
blind spot for those of us who a
avoidant the understanding that we could
go to our partners with our problems
without having a solution to them in
place and just see what might happen if
we explored the problem together and
found a creative solution
in order to do that we have to flip out
of that I am okay you are not okay
worldview because if we believe that our
partners are not competent or capable of
helping us work with our problems we're
not going to be going to them with them
and then we're not going to be finding
the solutions that could actually get
worked with so if you find yourself in
Conflict Cycles with your partner that
you're struggling to resolve really ask
yourself am I looking at this person as
a competent and capable adult who I
could bring my Str TR and
vulnerabilities to or am I seeing them
as a helpless child and sometimes it's
going to sober us up and go you know
what I can talk to this person or let me
try it and just see what happens but
other times maybe we're going to try it
out and find that our partner is quite
upset by us bringing our problems to
them or trying to involve them in the
problem solving process in which case we
want to be looking at blind spot number
four which is the fear of criticism
slash need to be seen as perfect
blind spot so to have an avoidant
attachment style is to have it laced
deeply into your unconscious mind that
you are worthy of love in so far as you
are taking care of yourself and your
system believes if I am taking great
care of myself and I keep my life
running smoothly someone is going to
come along they are going to appreciate
this perfect life that I've developed
and that is what love is the problem is
that that is not what love is what
secure love is is two people seeing each
other's challenges and struggles and
supporting each other through them and a
secure person is naturally going to come
along and look for those things in you
and go oh I wonder where this person is
struggling or where they need support as
well as seeing your strengths because
that's what secure love is it's a very
balanced
Affair versus Partners who want to
idealize you if someone comes along and
they go oh wow everything you're doing
is perfect that's going to match your
model of reality which says I'm okay
you're not okay right and the problem is
when you're operating out of that model
you're now picking Partners who are kind
of willfully blind to your challenges
and struggles and
vulnerabilities and so they might really
struggle as the relationship progresses
if you start bringing those things to
the table because they have this
idealized version of you in their mind
that doesn't struggle with anything and
so it might actually be very
dysregulating for them if you are to
start bringing those things into the
dynamic but but because you are so
accustomed to dissociating from or
downplaying the areas in which you're
struggling it's probably going to be a
lot more comfortable for you to be in
the type of dynamic where your partner
never brings those things up than it is
for you to be in a more secure Dynamic
where someone is actively noticing the
things that you're struggling with them
pointing those things out might feel
like criticism or like they're implying
you are not perfect or good enough for
them when in reality they might actually
just be showing up with compassion and
care
and so what we need to do to work
through this blind spot is to start
getting more comfortable being seen
holistically so not just for the areas
where we are killing it and knocking it
out of the ballpark and exhibiting our
strengths which are of course all areas
that we also need to have seen and
recognized inside of
relationships but also the areas where
we are unfinished products and where
we're just looking for someone who's
willing to come along for the ride as we
move towards our own development so
again someone who is not going to
idealize us but who is going to actively
be looking for and responding to the
areas where we need their help and
support as well and then the fifth and
last blind spot we're going to talk
about today is the Attunement blind spot
so earlier on in this video we talked
about that experience of being adapted
to slightly more emotionally hostile
environments and where this really shows
up is the way that we learn to navigate
relationships so in environments where
the relational glue that keeps people
together is not sharing their feelings
and staying present and attuned to one
another on an emotional level what often
happens is you learn to navigate
relationships very subtly through a
series of rules that you are
continuously developing inside of your
mind or you can think of this as kind of
a string of if then reasoning statements
so this might look like as a child if
mom looks happy in the mornings then I
will go approach her for a Hut if mom
looks unhappy then I will keep my
distance to avoid getting rejected and
again this is not conscious right but
it's the way that your mind starts
gathering information because it
actually works in your environment and
adapting to it so that you can minimize
your risk of rejection and as you go
through life you start doing this very
naturally you start observing people's
behavioral patterns and naturally
adapting how you relate to them based on
those patterns and generally because
this was probably true in the
environments you grew up in if someone
seems like they're struggling
emotionally you might feel like the
polite thing to do is to back off not
ask too many questions and give them
their privacy or for other avoidance
it's going to feel like time to hop in
and do the I'm okay you're not okay
thing where I caretake this person but
the important thing to keep in mind is
that when you learn to navigate
relationships this way through
observation and adaptation rather than
emotional Attunement and connection you
develop a blind spot around the fact
that that is actually a really important
part of what makes relationships work so
once again we're right back to that
first issue of the avoidant person not
understanding why their partner is so
upset about the words they're saying
well they might be completely and
totally dissociated from the vibe that
they are giving off and so what we want
to draw our attention to here is
practicing the art of emotional
Attunement and I have a whole video on
this that I will link in the description
of this one but essentially what
Attunement allows us to do is to stay in
an interpersonal flow with someone where
we don't have to be in that state
especially in Conflict where we are
analyzing the other person and trying to
figure out what to do or say to them by
making sense of what they're bringing
into us something that I notice is
really common in Conflict Dynamics is
that avoidantly attached people will not
even be looking at their partner in the
middle of a heated conflict they will be
looking off into space kind of squinting
and trying to figure out okay why is
this person saying this what's the
solution here and this is in most cases
quite well intentioned because the only
model you might have for relational
repair if you adapted to those more
hostile emotional environments is
figuring out all the logic bringing it
to the table and then everyone agreeing
on it but in more secure relationships
that is only half of what you need to
stay healthy within them and the other
half of what you need is to be able to
sit in front of your partner and connect
with put them on an emotional level and
actually open yourself up to feeling
things alongside your partner so that
you can get into this flow so that they
feel as though you are attuning to their
experience and responding in the moment
to what's going on for them emotionally
again I have a video that breaks this
process down to the nitty-gritty details
that you can find in the description so
I'm not going to go too into how to do
the atunement dance but what I just want
to do is bring it to your attention as
an important piece that you might be
missing so trying to navigate personal
relationships without being attuned to
the other person is kind of like trying
to dance to a song If you can't hear the
music you can memorize all the dance
moves but there's something that your
body just needs to be deeply connected
to and in a flow state with in order for
the dance to not look super awkward and
weird and that is the same case for
connecting to another human being in
order for the connection to actually
flow naturally and authentically and for
conflict to get resolved at the
emotional level that it exists at you
have to be able to hear the music of
your connection with this person and you
can only hear the music through attuning
to them and getting a felt sense in your
body of what is happening for the other
person
emotionally which you can only do if you
are looking them in the eyes in these
challenging situations
and actually staying on the page with
them in your emotional body not just in
your mind and then eventually when
you're able to marry these Concepts so
you're able to sit with people's
emotional bodies and respond to them
from your emotional body and you're also
able to make sense of why you're getting
into these conflict Cycles this is where
you start finding those Holistic
Solutions to conflicts that actually
make the problem go away instead of just
temporarily disappear and then come back
up the second something else goes
wrong all right I am going to leave it
at that for today but as always let me
know in the comments section any
thoughts feelings questions you have
coming up as you've gone through this
video I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]