hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about maintaining our personal Integrity
inside of close relationships and today
I want to talk about a topic that is
very close to the heart of this issue
which is how can we make sure that we
are giving ourselves the best possible
chance at being in relationships that
make it feel easy to be connected to our
integrity and what do we do when we feel
feel like the close relationships in our
lives actually challenge that quite a
bit so one thing that I want to get
clear on right from the get-go is that I
don't like the traditional usage of the
word toxic in that when I hear it being
used to describe people or relational
Dynamics it often seems like there's
this implied sense that one or both
people are inherently morally flawed or
bad in some way and I just want to get
clear from the get-go that when I am
using the term toxic to Des cribe
relational Dynamics here what I am
definitely not saying is that one or
both people in the dynamic have
unrecoverable moral injuries or flaws
what I'm referencing here is any
relational Dynamic where the way that
the relationship functions essentially
drains one or both people much much more
than it replenishes them and this could
happen for a variety of reasons so a
quick example is very often when you
have one an anxious person and one
avoidant person in a romantic
relationship with each other the
behavior that each person does that
triggers the other the most is in the
blind spot of the person doing that
behavior which leads to this Dynamic
where both people feel as though they
are behaving morally and doing the right
thing in the relationship but the other
person is responsible for all of the
ways in which the relationship is going
wrong and some things like this can
actually be fixed potentially
with a lot more Awareness on behalf of
both people so I'm not saying that these
relationships are unrecoverable but
sometimes that's the case sometimes you
actually get a situation where people's
attachment wounds are quite compatible
but the underlying core of who they both
are as people turns out to not be that
compatible once they get the attachment
wounding out of the way so there's huge
variation in terms of what it means to
have a toxic dynamic as well as what can
be done about it but today I want talk
specifically about how even if all of
those uncertainties are in place we can
make sure that we are maintaining our
own Integrity inside of relationships
and not creating more challenge for
ourselves in places where it doesn't
need to exist and the quick kind of
warning that I want to give out here is
that if you put these boundaries into
place they're likely to work which means
they're going to bring you closer to a
place where you have a very good chance
at being in a healthy secure
relationship with another healthy and
secure person but these boundaries are
likely to make the people in your life
who you are incompatible with on some
major way whether that means that you're
wounding triggers each other or there's
just things about you and this other
person that just don't Jive at the end
of the day these boundaries might be the
things that make those types of
relationships reach their natural end so
these boundaries are not Magic Bullets
that will fix the most dysfunctional
relationships but they will help you get
to a place where you can feel like you
are confident in your ability to be in a
healthy relationship which I think is
often what holds back a lot of us who
air insecurely attached from seeking out
more secure leaning Partners so a quick
example of this several years ago I took
a trip to visit a close friend who I
hadn't seen in a while and on that trip
he was kind of catching me up on this
new relationship he was in and there was
a lot of stuff he was telling me about
his partner that he seen seemed really
dissatisfied with but almost every time
he would tell me something he was
unhappy about he would qualify it or
follow it up with some version of but I
do the same thing too and something
about that qualification really stuck
with me I kept thinking it didn't quite
sit right with me that that was the way
he was reasoning about these things and
so I remember on the plane ride home
sitting with all of the stuff that he
had told me and thinking to myself I
wonder what what would happen for this
person if instead of telling himself I'm
behaving disrespectfully and she's
behaving disrespectfully so those things
cancel each other out he started both
holding his partner accountable for the
ways in which she was disrespecting him
and also holding himself accountable for
the ways in which he was disrespecting
his partner and it occurred to me that
that would actually create a really
beautiful upward spiral in their
relationship where they could both grow
a lot as people and as a couple and at
the time I still had a lot of insecure
patterning online myself so when I got
off the plane and went back to my
day-to-day life I started really
thinking about this and going okay in
which ways am I kind of writing off two
wrongs as making a right and what would
happen if I started holding myself and
the people in my life accountable for
the ways in which we're hurting each
other or letting each other down or just
generally behaving poorly towards each
other
and in some cases this made a lot of
relationships change for the better but
in other cases I would say kind of the
majority for reasons that completely
make sense a lot of people weren't
willing to meet me there and so what I
started wondering then was What If
instead of assuming that both people
have to be on board for this to work I
just looked at keeping my side of the
street clean what if I decided that no
matter how often someone disrespects me
or does something that frustrates me I
was not going to allow myself to behave
in a way that I would ultimately feel
not proud of in response and my first
thought was well then I would probably
start getting really frustrated with the
people in my life who were behaving less
honestly or less honorably if I were
always holding myself accountable to not
reacting on an equal playing field to
them and then it struck me wait a minute
if I did this for long enough I would
probably start growing proud of the
person that I am and the way that I'm
showing up inside of relationships and I
imagine over time relationships with
people who don't employ these more
honest and direct communication
strategies would start to look less
attractive to me because I would
understand on a deep core body-based
level because I had proven to myself
that it was true that I would be capable
of functioning in a relationship that
doesn't include these types of
interactions and so this began a journey
of figuring out how I could do that and
how I could keep my sense of Integrity
intact inside of relationships to the
point where I felt like I was ready for
more secure reciprocal Dynamics so this
video is an exploration of some of the
boundaries that really helped me in this
process as well as some of the kind of
challenging and difficult to digest
truths that came along with setting
those boundaries so we're going to dive
into what those boundaries are with the
caveat that all of these are boundaries
we need to set with ourselves so this is
not about trying to control or change
other people's behavior in fact a lot of
these boundaries are about setting
boundaries with the parts of ourselves
that want to control and change other
people's behavior because again all we
can do here is keep our side of the
street clean and make ourselves ready
for better Dynamics when they come along
the first self- boundary that I think
goes a long way in the direction of
maintaining our integrity inside of
relationships is the boundary if I can
only get my needs met in a relationship
through force or manipulation including
and especially if I have first tried to
get my needs met honestly and the other
person is uninterested in meeting them I
owe it to myself to walk away from that
relationship or to set boundaries that
allow me to not rely on it in the same
way instead of moving into that space
where I'm trying to get my needs met in
a manipulative way so what we're going
to talk about here is the fact that very
often when we are insecurely attached we
don't see the things we are doing as
manipulative we don't see our attachment
strategies as manipulative because at
the time that we developed them they
were genuinely not when we are children
what we are doing is adapting to our
environment by any means possible and so
if our parents are not meeting our needs
we don't have another way of getting our
needs met right children are not
autonomous members of society and so
it's actually adaptive for us to find
unconscious strategies to get our needs
met through our parents if they were
refusing to meet them when we asked them
directly so this might look like if you
are on the anxious side of the spectrum
your parent may have been willing to
meet your needs but quite busy and
unable to attend to you all the time and
so what may have been adaptive for you
as a child if your parent was unwilling
to attend to your need when you
expressed it at the volume that it
existed at is you may have started to
unconsciously automatically amplify the
volume of your emotions and show more
and more distress until they attended to
you or as you got older you may have
even learned that lashing out towards
your parent or telling them something
negative you think about them would get
their attention and it would get them to
see how badly you were hurt and how much
you were in need nobody wants that to be
the way of getting their needs met but
one of my favorite quotes on this topic
by margalis felstead goes if there is no
way to get what you want from direct
approach then manipulation is the only
solution manipulation is the tool of the
powerless person and when we are
children we are all powerless to get all
of our needs met on our own but when we
are adults we are no longer powerless
I'm just going to put that point down
there and return to it again shortly on
the flip side of things for those of us
with more avoidant patterning or early
on in life you were likely rejected by
your caregivers if you were to show Too
Much need or vulnerability and so what
your system naturally started doing for
you without you being conscious of it is
shutting down the areas of yourself that
notice when you are in need or when you
feel vulnerable and that worked pretty
well for you as a child because it meant
that your parents were not disgusted by
you and they did not reject you when you
were in need but as an adult expr
pressing needs and vulnerabilities are a
big part of what keeps a relationship
running healthfully so if you don't know
how to do this what was once adaptive
for you in childhood is going to become
accidentally or unconsciously
manipulative in an adult relationship
the same way the anxious person who had
a very adaptive strategy in childhood
that forced their parents to meet their
needs enough would be unconsciously
behaving manipulatively in adulthood if
they were to use the same strategy on an
adult partner who is not responsible for
meeting their needs the way a parent is
the problem is that when you grow up
insecurely attached you generally don't
have a natural transition into the world
of interdependent adult relationships so
the securely attached child learns
healthy dependency on their parent and
then they grow steadily more independent
as they grow up until they get to a
place where they understand that they
have a lot of different strategies for
getting their needs met some of which
are interpersonal some of which are
personal and often there's fluidity
between those things so at the points in
their lives where they have more people
around more needs they can get met
interpersonally they might rely more on
their partner or on their Community but
during the periods of their lives where
they have less of those resources
available they still have strategies for
meeting a lot of their own needs and
seeking out new Healthy Partnerships or
Community to eventually get back into
that more interdependent patterning the
difference is that when you grow up
insecurely attached you often just kind
of carry on with your original strategy
for getting your needs met without
really checking in on whether it still
applies to the adult world so what this
means is that if you a anxious you might
unconsciously have this strategy online
that if I have an attachment to somebody
so if I have an attachment to let's say
my partner they are responsible for
helping me regulate my feelings whenever
I'm distressed and for meeting my
emotional needs the way that my parent
was once responsible for that or if you
have more avoidant patterning online you
might still have that implicit belief
that everybody is responsible for
meeting their own needs and that there's
no reason for you to show any
vulnerability or need interpersonally
which often means that when you get to a
place where your partner is in need or
showing vulnerability that same voice
that shuts it down in you when it comes
up is naturally going to shut down or
dissociate from your partner being in
that state which might be accidentally
conditioning your partner to shut down
parts of themselves in order to stay
close to you the same way that happened
to you as a child and again this is not
a conscious manipulation but it's not a
direct and honest exchange of what's
going on for both people because your
vulnerabilities and what's actually
going on for you that's causing you to
shut down in those situations are not
conscious to you and so the work that
needs to get done here is making
yourself aware of what your own
vulnerabilities and challenges are so
that you can sensitize yourself enough
to them to become aware of them and then
to bring them into the partnership
because we can only meet other people as
deeply as we've met ourselves and if you
haven't met yourself on that deep level
as soon as your partner tries to go
there with you you're going to shut down
and on the flip side of the process if
you air anxious and you feel like when
you're bringing in your needs and
vulnerabilities to your partner they're
refusing to meet them maybe they're
dissociating from them maybe they're not
interested in them maybe they show
contempt in response to you being honest
and direct about what your needs are you
might automatically believe that that
gives you permission to then try to get
your needs met by your partner through
any means possible so maybe you amplify
and amplify your emotion trying to get
their attention maybe you start
attacking their character because you
believe that if you can get them to see
how bad of a person they are and how
badly they're behaving then they they
will turn around and attend to your
needs but what's in your blind spot in
this situation is that your partner is
not your parent and in healthy secure
romantic relationships if someone does
not want to meet our needs we have two
options one is to distance ourselves or
leave that relationship because if
there's a way in which we really want to
be close to someone and someone does not
want to be close to us in that way the
secure thing to do is to accept that
this is probably not the relationship
for me or the other option is to accept
the limitations of the relationship and
except I can't make this person change I
cannot make them care about my needs and
I owe it to my own Integrity to not try
to force them to care about my needs if
they don't want to so I'm going to
accept that this is something I'm not
going to be able to get out of this
person at least for the time being and
I'm going to find ways to get my needs
met in more flexible and adaptive ways
so maybe need to bring in some extra
friends in this area or maybe I need to
find ways to self soothe and
self-regulate around the areas that my
partner does not want to meet me in and
so which of those you go with is going
to be a personal choice and the same is
true on the avoidant side of the
spectrum but the idea here is that we
are continuously coming back to the
moment where we are frustrated with our
partner maybe we feel like they're too
dismissive or they're too needy and
we're reminding ourselves I am an adult
and they are an adult I cannot respond
to them the way I would respond to my
parent when I was a child so through
either activation or
deactivation I have a choice Point here
where I can be honest and direct with
them and say something like hey I'm
really sad that you're not willing to
meet me here and then step back and
figure out what you want to do about the
fact that they're unwilling to meet you
there or to say to your partner I feel
really overwhelmed by how much you seem
to want from me I'm not sure that I'm
capable of giving you what you need and
both of these have the potential to open
up a direct and honest line of
communication but if that doesn't happen
the self- boundary of I will not force
someone to show up the way I want them
to show up comes online I will allow
them to have whatever reaction they want
to have to set whatever boundaries they
want to set and then I will spend time
with myself and I will decide is this
the right person for me given the fact
that they don't seem to want to meet me
in X Y or Z area which blends really
naturally into the second self boundary
which is I will see needs in a
relationship as a consent-based thing
not a coercion based thing which means
it's my responsibility to seek out
people to be close to who authentically
want to give and receive love in the
same way that I want to give and receive
love so this one was a big frame shift
for me I had to go from thinking that no
nobody's needs were anybody else's
responsibility to meet to realizing that
part of the joy of really close intimate
connections is that people enjoy meeting
each other's needs and that for me when
I really love someone and want to be
close to them it is a privilege to be
that person's go-to person for me to be
the first person they call or think of
when they have something that they want
to go over or when they need some
support or
co-regulation and it works in the
opposite direction too it's a privilege
for someone else to be the person who I
see as my go-to person who I want to
immediately call to talk things over
with or to share little parts of my day
with and that adult secure relationships
are not these manipulative places where
everyone's trying to force each other
into doing things for each other it's
about finding someone who just
authentically likes you and who you
authentically like and who you enjoy
giving to and receiving from and vice
versa so what it helps check in on here
is this ask yourself the question if I
were in a relationship with someone who
gave and received love in the same way
that I do how healthy and functional
would that relationship be and you might
find that some interesting things come
up for you in the exploration of that
question so I had to admit to myself
that if I were in a relationship at the
point I was asking myself this question
with someone who was exactly like me I'd
be like that's a really stubborn and
uncom compromising person and it would
probably be pretty hard for me to get
close to them because I would have to do
a lot of compromising to fit myself into
their life and this is often the case
with those of us who air a little bit
more avoidant we have this story in our
heads that we are doing the right thing
by keeping ourselves self-regulated and
we're not noticing how much of the
proximity seeking and how much of the
relational glue we are unconsciously
requiring the other person to provide in
order to stay close to us and then on
the flip side of things if you air more
anxious you might have to accept that
being in a more secure partnership means
you're going to have a partner who has a
lot of their own needs and
vulnerabilities that they regularly
bring to you and you're going to have to
get comfortable switching off in that
secure base role instead of always
expecting your partner to be the one who
is strong and capable and invulnerable
which might be unconsciously what your
system keeps seeking out so this
question often points towards some
really important areas for growth that
we need to do in order to be ready for a
secure relationship but this all starts
with making the decision that we are
going to seek people out who are happy
to be with us in the way that we want to
be with someone and that might mean
there's lots of growth to do on our
behalf to make ourselves ready for the
kind of person who we would want to be
with which puts us right into self
boundary number three which is I will
engage in good faith relationships so I
will pick partners for myself who I
truly deeply believe are my intellectual
and my moral or emotional equal I will
not date people who I put on a pedestal
and I will not date people who I
secretly think are beneath me in some
way it's really really hard to feel like
we are in Integrity with ourselves if we
are in a relationship with someone who
we do not truly and genuinely respect as
a human being and it is also really hard
to be in Integrity with ourselves if we
are willing to throw our self-respect
out the window for the sake of a
relationship so at this phase we're
probably going to have to examine our
model of people in the world and
relationships so if we air more avoidant
we tend to have that worldview of I'm
okay other people are not okay and so we
might unconsciously be picking Partners
Who We Believe are a lot more needy than
we are and then when we stop and think
well what would it look like to pick a
partner who is truly as competent and
capable of dealing with their lives as I
am what might come online is this
realization that ooh then I would
actually be seen by another person if I
felt like I was dating someone who is
truly my intellectual equal then I
wouldn't be able to get away with the
things that I kind of on some level know
I'm getting away with by my partner not
being able to see me fully and that
might be a really scary thought and we
might have to do some work on getting to
the place where being fully seen and
sometimes being challenged by another
person does not feel deeply offensive
and repulsive to us and on the flip side
of things for those who air more anxious
if you were with someone who was as
emotionally available as you or at least
as emotionally available as a secure
person it's likely that you wouldn't
feel as soothed and protected as you do
dating more avoidant types who suppress
their
vulnerabilities so what would more
likely happen in a relationship like
that is that your own disregulation
would come online more often and you
would need to find ways to self- sooe
more often so that you could be a
reasonably matched partner for someone
who needs you to be in the secure base
role for them approximately as often as
they are doing the same for you so if we
go out deliberately searching for a
partnership in which we consider the
other person our true equal both
intellectually and emotionally we're
going to have to confront all of the
stuff in ourselves that choosing
Partners who don't fully see us allows
us to normally hide or dissociate from
and this is a really scary step but a
really important one that pushes Us in
the direction of secure relating in a
fast way the force self boundary that
helps us maintain a sense of Integrity
inside of our relationships is I owe it
to myself to add advocate for my needs
inside of a relationship and to not
allow myself to grow resentful I cannot
be in a goodfaith relationship with
someone else if I'm withholding
significant pieces of information about
the relationship that are high salience
for me
internally so if I find myself growing
repeatedly frustrated by something that
my partner says or does or by some
expectation that they have of me that I
don't want to meet I owe it to the
relationship to bring that thing forward
forward and talk about how we could work
with it instead of holding on to that
resentment and letting it
Fester resentment absolutely drives
relationships into the ground and so if
we want our relationships to be healthy
and to thrive we need to get comfortable
sensitizing ourselves to what our own
needs are and to what our feelings are
inside of a relationship and then
bringing them forward rather than
growing angry and contemptuous towards
our partners under the surface so a
skill that I've been trying to hone over
the years is the skill of simply saying
to another human being hey I want to
bring this up because I notice that I'm
growing resentful about it and I really
don't want there to be any form of
resentment in our relationship so can we
maybe talk out some of the ways we might
be able to approach this situation
differently so that I can let go of that
resentment and just get back into the
form of connection where I can look at
you and just feel grateful that you're
in my life and in securely attached
Dynamics these types of things come up
all of the time it's not that secure
people never grow frustrated with each
other never get angry at one another
never resent each other it's that they
talk about it when it happens they don't
make it into a moral right versus wrong
situation they just look at how can we
fix this so that both people's needs are
getting met as consistently as
possible but it's impossible to get
there if we have blocks around bringing
up our own feelings to the other person
so this might be that we don't really
know why we tend to get suddenly
resentful or frustrated with our partner
it just comes online and suddenly we
don't like them anymore this is more
often akin to an avoidant deactivation
response or on the other side it could
feel like my partner is so unwilling to
meet even the most basic of my needs
that I have to chronically be bringing
them up and I'm growing resentful about
that and in both of these scenarios once
again we refer to boundary number one
can I be honest about what's happening
if I air more avoidant can I really try
to tune in to what my feelings are that
are behind that sense of growing
contempt or frustration with my partner
and communicate those feelings and if I
air more anxious can I accept that if my
partner simply doesn't want to meet my
needs it might be time for me to
distance myself from the relationship
figure out why I'm continuously chasing
Partners who don't seem to want to meet
my needs and then figure out a different
approach which might require a bunch of
self-work for being in more secure
Partnerships where there is a more
healthy and natural reciprocation of
needs but the idea is that if we don't
bring up the things we feel challenged
by in relationships and we allow
ourselves to grow resentful of our
partners without giving them the
opportunity to respond to the thing that
we're frustrated with we're not really
engaging in good faith and so that's
eventually going to bleed back into our
self-concept and we're going to feel
less and less proud of ourselves because
we're not being honest in our
relationship so maintaining that sense
of Integrity here means being willing to
take our own needs seriously and
bringing them up in a fair and neutral
way which by the way if that's a
challenge for you I have a video I
posted earlier this week that is all
about how to do this which I will link
in the description of this video so you
can go check that out next if this is an
area that you feel kind of stumped on
and the last self boundary which is
really just an amalgamation of all of
the above is I will have standards for
how I treat other people including how I
treat myself that I uphold regardless of
how I am treated so this is how we get
out of that two wrongs make a right
mentality right this is the opposite of
going well my partner is disrespectful
towards me but I'm disrespectful towards
them so these cancel each other out this
is how we get in Integrity we go even if
the other person is behaving
manipulatively even if the other person
is being
unreasonable even if the other person is
an absolutely terrible person who should
never have a relationship ever again in
their lives I will not fall out of
Integrity with myself in order to be
close with them if my options are behave
manipulatively and lose my self-respect
but keep the
relationship or keep my self respect but
lose the relationship I will choose the
latter as hard as it will be because the
more I get it into my bones that I am a
person who respects both myself and
other people the more I Am Naturally
going to start seeking out more healthy
relational Dynamics it's just going to
be the thing that feels right but it's
often a very very long journey of
getting here so the last story I want to
tell is a story that's actually not mine
it's from a book called why does he do
that by Lundy boft and the author of
this book does anger management programs
with people who are either in prison or
in most cases mandated to take the
programs and he talks about what the
most common things that he hears from
people who end up in this program are
and one of the things that he apparently
hears over and over again from people
coming in with these explosive tempers
is I have anger issues and what he
responds to them is the anger is not the
problem you have an abuse problem but
this is a very very key distinction that
a lot of us do not make we often imagine
that having a certain feeling or having
a certain thing done to us means we are
then Justified to respond in whatever
way we see fit or whatever way our
emotional system is screaming at us to
respond in and learning to practice
self- Integrity in the face of these
really challenging relationships means
deciding that we will not stoop to the
other person's level we will remove
ourselves if we are being baited into a
dynamic that is going to take us out of
Integrity with ourselves and it's going
to be really hard in the moment but in
so far as we can practice these
boundaries and build ourselves into
people who will not behave
manipulatively or disrespectfully
regardless of how other people treat us
the more we feel like we are deserving
of healthy Mutual loving relationships
in all areas of our lives and so the
easier it will become for us over time
to remove ourselves from these
situations practice self- respect and
put ourselves in healthier ones which by
that point we will know without a shadow
of a doubt because we have proved it to
be true for ourselves over and over and
over again that we are ready for healthy
secure love so respecting others means
not lashing out even if we are lashed
out at and respecting ourselves means
taking ourselves out of situations where
others are behaving badly or abusively
towards us refusing to numb out the pain
that those situations cause and then
finding ways to be in connection with
healthier people all right I think I'm
going to leave it at that for today but
as always any questions thoughts that
you have coming up as you've been going
through this please leave them in the
comment section below I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and I will see you back
here again really soon
[Music]