if you have an avoidant attachment style
you probably internalized from a young
age that strong displays of emotion are
always unreasonable and ought to be
avoided when in reality this is only
true of strong displays of emotion that
leave out the capacity for reason and
integration what the most rational
people know the people who are out there
having strong growth oriented
relationships that are not in constant
chaos and upheaval is that in order for
a relationship to flourish you need to
be able to take both your own feelings
and your partner's feelings seriously
then you need to be able to sit down
unpack those feelings and figure out
what's getting missed in your Dynamic
that is holding both of you back only
then are you going to be able to find
better ways forward that stop the
madness of constant fighting and
actually allow you to focus on what
matters which is your individual and
Collective growth