hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about heartbreak and today specifically
what I want to talk about is how to heal
heartbreak more efficiently and when I
say heal it this is a really important
word to pay attention to because I think
that a lot of us mix up the process of
moving on from heartbreak with the
process of healing it so we kind of
consider ourselves done with our
heartbreak as soon as we no longer feel
the pain of it but a lot of the time
what that means is that we rush really
quickly into whatever is going to
distract us rather than what is going to
help us actually integrate it and move
on as whole people when we do not
integrate our heartbreaks what we do
instead is
compartmentalize so we shove into some
little room inside of us every that
reminds us of the person or the thing
that we have lost and we find a way to
go on as fragmented versions of
ourselves and then down the line we
might find ourselves repeating the exact
same patterns the exact same
relationship mistakes that led to pain
in the past so we might actually be
perpetuating the pain that we're feeling
on a much longer time scale then we
would if we were to stay present with it
when it comes up in our lives and
actually get to know it so today we're
going to talk about what that looks like
what does it look like to really
integrate and move on from a heartbreak
with our whole selves rather than simply
getting some distance from it but not
ever actually healing the wound I think
that I could actually say in complete
honesty that for the first three decades
of my life I never got over anything
that happened to me I just found
increasingly creative ways to either
distract myself from or devalue the
experiences I'd gone through and the
people and things I'd loved that I'd
lost and then I would just go back into
those same patterns over and over and
over again and what's interesting is
that at this point in my life I can
still say that I have never gotten over
anything or anyone that I have deeply
loved but that phrase has a new meaning
now now what that means is I've found a
way to really integrate and keep with me
the incredibly valuable parts of
everything and everyone that I have
loved and Been Loved by so all of those
people and those things still exist
inside of me but I don't have to avoid
thinking about them or feeling the
impact in order to feel whole and okay
as a person in fact those experiences of
loss now enrich my ability to stay
present with myself and other people as
I go through through my life but it
definitely takes some work to get there
so the idea of befriending different
emotional states is a Buddhist concept
the first time I kind of came across
this terminology was at an event I went
to where one of the speakers who's now a
good friend of mine and a monk were
talking about shame and at the end of
this conversation that they had about
shame where there was about 10 to 15 of
us listening in one of the people in the
audience addressed both of the speakers
and said I want to thank you both for
befriending your shame which brought you
to this place where you could share all
of these lessons about it to the rest of
us and I remember thinking that it's
such a funny saying right befriending
shame at a first glance that's something
that nobody would want to do but he was
right these two individuals befriending
their shame had brought them to a place
where they could share a lot of lessons
with the rest of us about how to
navigate through it and when we know how
to navigate through any particularly
painful destabilizing emotion it helps
us live the rest of our lives in a more
balanced and Discerning way and the same
is true of befriending something like
heartbreak when we really get to know
the inside outs of what breaks our heart
it reveals an incredible amount to us
about what matters to us in life and how
we can intentionally design our lives so
that we are having a more more
meaningful experience of it so we're
going to talk about what that literally
means when we talk about befriending an
emotional state I want to challenge us
to think of this as befriending a
literal person so if you made a new
friend and you wanted to get to know
them better what might you do the first
thing you would probably do is get
curious about them and spend time
getting to know them observing their
patterns observing what it is that they
like to pay attention to
and this is the exact same process that
we can take with something like a
heartbreak we don't have to fix it right
away we don't have to run away from it
we can simply stay with it and start
noticing its patterns when is heartbreak
most active what does it want to draw
our attention to what are the little
nuances of this emotional experience
that we're going through can we be
curious about it and get to know it as
much as possible can we carve out time
intentionally to be with it and to
listen to what it is telling us the next
thing that we would do if we were making
friends with a real person is we would
start to set boundaries with that person
we would start to notice when do they
really want to hang out that's kind of
inconvenient for me and how can I let
them know hey I will pay attention to
you and I will spend time with you but I
can't do it during these hours how about
about we make a date for this night
instead we make sure that the friend
knows we want to spend time with them
but we can't just spend time with them
whenever so just like we would negotiate
our boundaries with another person we
can also negotiate our boundaries with
our own emotional state this means not
dismissing it but being an adult about
when we can and cannot attend to it and
the third thing that we would do if we
were developing a really close and
emotionally intimate friendship with
someone is we would make the choice to
let them affect us and this is something
that depending on what type of
patterning you have in the attachment
realm you might actually not do all that
much with friends or Partners or
emotional states maybe your coping
strategy in the face of loss is finding
a way to make it not matter and when we
make things not matter when we dismiss
them from our awareness
when we tell ourselves this is not
something it's worth paying attention to
what happens is that we miss out on the
lessons that thing is there to teach us
negative feelings do not exist within us
for no reason they exist within us
because they're trying to draw our
attention to an area where we need to
practice extra discernment so this idea
of being intentional about letting
people or things matter to us might be
something new that you need to practice
or you might be on the opposite end of
the spectrum maybe you give your
emotions so much attention and so much
importance that it's never occurred to
you that you could set a boundary with
them or that you could be a little bit
more in control of the relationship so
just notice whichever one of these feels
like the one you're more resistant to
might be where you want to naturally
Focus your attention really letting
something or someone matter to us means
practicing humility in the face of it so
accepting that this person or this
emotion or this state of heartbreak of
loss of grief has something meaningful
that I can learn from okay now let's
talk about the why behind this so when
we actually stay on the same page with
heartbreak what is the point of this
friendship that we're developing what is
it that we're trying to get out of this
and I think the most important thing to
focus on is that integration piece so
when we move past loss or grief or
relationships without paying attention
to what it was that was so valuable to
us about that relationship we end up in
this Perpetual space of unconsciously
trying to get the exact same thing back
but if we were to slow down and take
this opportunity to make the unconscious
aspects of whatever we have lost
conscious to us then we we get to pick
and choose what we want to integrate and
bring forward with us and what we want
to turn into a lesson that helps us
increase our discernment so if we find
ourselves in this state of grief where
we are just clinging to something that
is now left us what we want to do is sit
down and get really clear on what it is
that we have lost what is it about
ourselves that we were so used to
experiencing through this other person
that we now are deathly afraid we're
going to lose connection with inside of
ourselves so when I was with this person
if it's a romantic relationship that
you've lost what was online for me what
was I feeling what was I experiencing
what was it about this connection that
was unique who was I before meeting this
person before falling in love with this
person and then who was I inside of the
relationship how did I allow them to
affect me and to change the way that I
showed up so this is the practice of
going directly towards the main pain
points and figuring out this is the
thing I'm going to miss the most because
I feel like I can't access that thing
without this person and we're going to
pick out as many of those things as we
possibly can and just become incredibly
aware of the value that that person or
that experience brought to our lives
if we allow it to this can teach us
something very profound about what we
are unconsciously valuing in life often
the things that we consciously value in
life so I want this and I know that I
want it we just go out and try to get
directly the things that we
unconsciously value in life are the
things that we go out and get indirectly
so it's the type of people that we're
drawn to over and over again despite
feeling like ah something about this
just isn't right for me right I keep
dating people who are like this or I
keep ending up in dynamics that are like
this very often that's because we have
unconscious values or unconscious parts
of ourselves that want expression that
we find unbearable to accept that we
want and to go for directly so instead
we find ourselves continuously in
relationship with people who Express
those values enough for the both of us
so that we do not have to bear having
them made conscious in ourselves and as
Carl Young says until we make the
unconscious conscious it will direct our
lives and we will call it fate if we
allow it to heartbreak can be an
incredible opportunity to make the
unconscious conscious for ourselves and
in this way the friendship that we make
with heartbreak can be incredibly
beneficial but we have to be willing to
look directly at and in some cases go
out searching for the pain that
heartbreak is bringing into our lives to
understand what it is that we are
missing so
profoundly so I remember one of the most
challenging weeks of my life was the
week that I finished my dissertation for
my Master's Degree because a couple of
months prior to that a long-term
romantic relationship that I'd been in
had come to an end and I remember just
trying to put everything as out of my
awareness as humanly possible in order
to really focus on my work and get my
degree finished but in the last seven
days before I had to hand in my
dissertation I was just in this total
crunch period I was sleeping at weird
times I was eating Doritos for breakfast
nothing about my life was regular or in
any way regulating so I was finding
myself feeling quite overwhelmed
emotionally and one night I fell asleep
at my desk around 2 or 3 a.m. and I had
this incredibly Viv
dream that my ex partner was sitting
beside me offering incredibly kind words
of encouragement letting me know that I
would finish this I would do a good job
at it and it was okay to give myself
some patience and some softness in the
process and I remember waking up and
feeling in my body State all of the
warmth and all of the care and affection
that I used to feel around that person
and I realized really viscerally how
absent those feelings of warmth and
support had been inside of me since I
had been with that person because I had
a story at that point that to do a good
job at anything you had to cut yourself
off from any sort of feeling State and
you had to just go Full Speed Ahead
ignore your emotions until it was done
and then once you had accomplished
whatever it was that you were trying to
get done maybe you could reward yourself
with a little bit of rest and
relaxation but I took that moment to
really become aware of the fact that my
unconscious mind needed that feeling of
care and support so badly that it had
pretty much hallucinated it it was one
of the most vivid dreams I'd ever had in
my life but I was so unable to give
those feelings to myself that my brain
had to conjure up in image of the last
person who had consistently G it to me
in order to give me that
experience and in that moment I realized
this is something I really need to start
baking into my life giving myself this
type of compassion and support even when
a goal needs to get accomplished or
something really hard needs to get done
is actually pretty necessary because
right now I feel a lot more resourced
than I did an hour ago because of this
feeling that I've brought into my body
and if if I can learn to integrate the
love and the patience and the care that
that person used to bring to my life and
allow myself to be present with that
energy in myself and not need the memory
of them to access it now I can go
forward as a more whole version of
myself and in that way I will forever be
carrying forward the energy of the first
person who I really allowed in with that
energy right
that partner will live on inside of me
forever because this room inside of me
that they unlocked I didn't lock back up
after they left I kept it open and I
allowed myself to keep going into it
whenever I needed to and now it's just a
place where I'm able to meet other
people as well so maybe for you you let
yourself feel valued and cared for by a
partner in a way that you struggle to
value and care for yourself maybe you
felt confident and adventurous with
someone else in a way that you don't
feel on your own so what this is is the
process of taking all the things that we
got from our relationships that were
positive and growing and finding ways to
keep that energy going without them to
internalize that this is a way we like
to be in the world but we were only
allowing ourselves to be that way
through permission from this other
person but we don't need that permission
anymore we can be intentional about
keeping keeping all of that alive and
allowing ourselves to keep growing in
the directions that we were growing with
that person without needing them
specifically in our lives to do it so
what we're doing here is refusing to
pull that old dismissive line of this
relationship didn't matter being loved
by anyone for any period of time matters
immensely if we are actually letting it
in it B definition is changing us and
the way that we are showing up in the
world and even just acknowledging that
acknowledging that it has changed us and
there are ways in which we would like to
stay changed is a huge step towards that
integration process that keeps us
feeling
whole now the next thing we want to pay
attention to is how the Heartbreak
itself is changing us so just like there
is an us before the relationship and in
US during the relationship and those two
people were very different and showed up
in very different ways there's also
going to be an us before the Heartbreak
and an US during the Heartbreak and this
is an idea that came from a really
wonderful book that I read on
befriending Heartbreak by a woman named
Susan pyer that book is called the
wisdom of a broken heart I will link it
in the description of this video and in
this book she talks at length about the
value of heartbreak itself and the idea
that if we stay present with it and on
the same page as it the process of
moving through grief and heartbreak is
going to fundamentally change us it
might change what our values are it
might change the way we think of the
world it might change the way that we
show up for ourselves and other people
so this idea that there is huge value
not just in the relationship that we now
need to internalize but in the process
of heartbreak itself
is something that I find very
interesting it's also kind of the
opposite of how heartbreak gets framed
in the media for example so when we
think of heartbreak most of us think of
this just terrible wretched state that
we need to find a way to get out of as
quickly as possible very few of us think
of it as a kind of gift or an
opportunity to get deeply in touch with
ourselves but there's a quote from this
book that I'm going to read that I just
think beautifully encapsulates the
opport opportunity that can be present
inside of heartbreak so in a chapter
that is eloquently titled yes you have
lost your mind but it's okay Susan pyer
writes volatility is an active state of
change for instance when heated water
becomes volatile and turns to Vapor in
its volatile state it more easily
combines with other substances it's able
to
change like it or not you have been
entered into a state of sacred
volatility whatever you thought you
possessed love security a picture of the
future a sense of being lovable is
shaken loose from its appearance
rendered momentarily formless through
the fire of
heartbreak now depending on your
approach you can attempt to squelch this
process and retain possession of
whatever old beliefs you have left or
through the grace of your attention and
acceptance you can open the door wide
let some air in and watch the Flames
grow let them burn until they burn out
by doing this you will make room for
something new to arise out of the ashes
what I love so much about this passage
is the idea of heartbreak as a state of
sacred volatility so how I kind of
interpret that is if we think of
heartbreak as the process of losing
something that we have become attached
to when we are attached to Something in
kind of the Buddhist sense of the term
we are imagining this illusion of
continuity and this is a very important
and vital part of being alive despite
the fact that all of us know that
everything in the world is in constant
motion and nothing is ever guaranteed to
stay in our lives forever most of us
spend our lives unconsciously
entertaining the illusion that many
things are going to last forever so even
if we kind of know in the back of our
minds someday everything and everyone I
love will be lost we don't go around
thinking about that because it would
just be very distressing for the ego but
when we do lose something that's
important to us what we're being
returned to temporarily is an awareness
of the authentic and true state of
things which is that nothing in our life
is permanent and that nothing is going
to last forever in the face of that
reality we can either Panic or we can
see it as a spiritual opportunity to
really stop and look at our lives and
examine how are we unconsciously
designing our lives and how might we
want to consciously design them better
now that we are in this state
involuntarily where we are recognizing
that everything is constantly in transit
we can have momentary Clarity Clarity
that the normal rhythms of life will
eventually come along and naturally
sweep us away from about what it is that
matters to us and what we want to make
matter going forward because when we
make that unconscious stuff conscious
then what we get to do is find creative
ways to consciously fulfill those needs
the way that we would choose to fulfill
them so through examining what parts of
ourselves had come to life through this
relationship or this situation that
we've now lost what does that tell us
about the way we want to live our lives
going forward what does it tell us about
how we want to love other people or give
back to the world or what is it telling
us about our dark side and our own
shadow what things have we repressed
that we are now unconsciously going
around trying continuously to get
fulfilled through other people and how
can we come face to face with those
things and be intentional about how we
want to bake them into our experience of
life in the future in a way that is
deliberate and that aligns with the
meaning we want our lives to have when
we approach heartbreak from a state of
deep humility so again from the
perspective of this matters and has
something to teach me we end up learning
not just from the relationship but also
from the experience of staying online
for the integration process and then
instead of becoming less whole through
the process of losing a person or a
thing that we have loved we become more
whole we end up learning about our
values we end up facing our shadows and
I will link in the description of this
video a series that I've done on Shadow
work I believe that heartbreak is one of
the most fruitful opportunities for us
to take on that work we learn things
about what we are unconsciously valuing
that can now be brought to the surface
and integrated in a more conscious way
and we become Kinder and deeper people
when we are willing to meet ourselves in
these spaces we become people who are
now comfortable sitting with the pain
and the grief and the loss of others
without needing to rush to fix it or to
make it better right away and that
ability to stay present with people is
what ends up helping us Foster really
deep intimate Connections in the future
when we don't need to either savior
other people or be savored from our own
pain heartbreak is kind of like the
universe coming up to you and handing
you a very heavy barbell and going you
can learn to spiritually lift this
weight right now if you want to and if
you take that opportunity to train
yourself into the type of person who can
lift that weight and who can stay
present with these experiences of loss
and grief you become an
incredibly strong person in your
day-to-day life going forward because
you no longer have to run from Tiny
moments of pain and grief and loss and
uncertainty that are absolutely inherent
to being alive so grief can be a
spiritual weight training session that
you walk away from having gained an
incredible amount of spiritual grit
spiritual grit is not the denial of pain
it is the ability to be with it and
where this inevitably leads us is out
the other side of this grief period
where there is a new way in which we are
whole so we no longer need this other
person or this situation that we lost to
feel whole we've allowed that person or
that experience to change us in a deep
way that we carry forward with us we've
spent time into grading and consciously
allowing ourselves to be changed both by
the person and the experience of losing
them and now the person we get to take
time getting to know is the new version
of ourselves we get to ask ourselves
what does wholeness look like for me now
in what ways am I now better at loving
both myself and other people what are
the new strengths that I have what are
the new opportunities that I'm excited
to go pursue
what do I now know about my own needs
and my own values that I didn't know
before and how can I now show up for
myself in a better way because I'm aware
of those things where can I now meet
other people in a really deep and
intimate way that I previously could not
meet them and how does that impact my
ability to get close with and stay close
with other people without getting
overwhelmed by either their pain and
suffering or my own so my kind of
conceptualization of what it means to
heal from a heartbreak is not when you
don't think about it anymore or not when
your life looks so radically different
that nothing reminds you of it it's when
you no longer need to avoid any part of
your conscious experience related to
that person or that heartbreak in order
to feel whole you can look back on the
relationship and make sense of it and
understand what it's possible for you to
take from it and how even the breakup or
the loss itself contributed to your
wholeness as a person so you're not out
in the world living as this fragmented
version of yourself that is running away
from certain internal experiences you
are able to stay on the page with all of
it that's what it means to heal
something rather than just move on from
it all right I think that's all I have
to say for today on this topic as always
let me know in the comments what you
guys are thinking or feeling or any
questions that you have I love you guys
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and I will see you back
here again really
[Music]
soon