hey guys heidi preeb here today i am
filming from a different location i
didn't feel like setting up my lights
but my bedroom is the best lit room in
my house it is also the smallest room in
my house but i wanted to make it my
bedroom because it had the best lighting
and if i don't wake up to sunshine my
entire day is just bad right away so
welcome to my room feels very intimate
having you here i just want to clarify
from the get-go i did not pick out these
pillows i don't have any taste in isfp
got these for me i shouldn't want to
like confuse everyone off the bat
so anyways today we are talking about
something that i'm just gonna be direct
with you and admit that i'm doing
because it is an seo optimized video
like the number two search for enfps is
enfp careers or enfp jobs or whatever so
i'll probably make this title something
along the lines of enfp career jobs uh
and you can click on it at your own risk
but no in all seriousness like it's a
decent topic i tend to think that
myers-briggs is not necessarily the best
tool for career exploration it isn't
harmful like it can tell us some things
about what we like and don't like but
what i started noticing when i was
looking at other articles and other
pieces of content out there around enfp
and careers is that a lot of the careers
that get suggested are definitely not
good careers for enfps they're good
careers for esfps so i think that what
is happening is that a lot of esfps are
testing enfp if you take the 16
personalities test there is almost a 100
chance that if you're an esfp you will
get the enfp result because that test is
terrible at testing for extroverted
sensing which is the dominant cognitive
function of the esfp very different from
the dominant cognitive function of the
enfp which is extroverted intuition and
we will talk a lot about the difference
between those two things as this video
goes on because if i were a young enfp
going to figure out what i want to do
for work and i saw a lot of the careers
that i see commonly listed as good
careers for enfps i would be like am i
the wrong personality type like what's
going on here um
some of the jobs that i see is like the
top jobs for us i've personally worked
and found them to be terrible terrible
fits for my personality so we are going
to talk over best and worst jobs for
enfps now of course this is very
subjective and there can be something
that anyone finds to love in any job so
i definitely don't think that like if
there's a career you're really
interested in but someone doesn't
recommend it for your personality type
don't let that stop you right there are
also a million different ways to make
any job your own so i don't want you to
feel limited by this list i don't want
you to ever replace your own judgment
with anything you read on the internet
about personality type
but if you just want to talk about what
i personally think what my advice would
be for enfps we can talk about that so
number one thing i actually think you
should figure out if you are looking to
figure out what type of career or what
type of work environment you want to go
into as an enfp is figure out what your
four tendencies personality type is so
the four tendencies is a system made up
by a woman called gretchen rubin and i
will probably make a video that's just
on the four tenancies because it's a
system i quite like
i have found that discovering my type
within that system was much more helpful
for me figuring out what i need in a
workplace than myers-briggs the
enneagram any other personality system
that i've found what the four tenancy
system tells you is how you like to be
held accountable so some people really
need external accountability some people
really need internal accountability
other people struggle with any sort of
accountability and some people need both
internal and external accountability so
just to disclose my own bias before we
get started on this list i am a
questioner in the four tenancy system
which means that once i make a
commitment to myself i will absolutely
hold that commitment i will see it
through no questions asked but i am not
as great at making commitments to other
people or to upholding the commitments
that i make that are external it doesn't
mean i can't do it but it isn't
naturally how i prefer to function so
for me more entrepreneurial roles where
i am holding myself responsible for the
work that i do and in control of what i
do and don't do in a given workday work
really well for me but if you're let's
say an enfp obliger where you really
struggle to create structure for
yourself and you need someone else to
provide that structure for you and i
actually think that's probably a pretty
common type for enfps in the four
tendency system you're going to need
very different things from a workplace
right so when we look at the structure
of what we need from a workplace through
the lens of both our personality type
and our four tendencies type you get a
much more specific vision of it i'll
just make a follow-up video on that i
will just give you guys that video um
today what i will talk about is just
more generally what specific jobs and
roles are best and worst suited to the
enfp personality type so what i did was
scour the internet and figure out what
advice is out there and then i compiled
a list of what i agree with and what i
don't agree with so we're going to go
through alternating between bad job good
job for enfps and
with no further rambling left in me for
now i will get started so i have seven
bad jobs and seven good jobs for enfps
and i'm gonna start with a bad job so a
bad job for enfps that i want to bring
up because i think there might be a
temptation to go into this as enfps
because it's kind of
ideologically similar to some things
that we enjoy but i actually think that
the day-to-day work of this job would
not be enjoyable for the average enfp
and that job is digital marketing so we
are very creative thinkers we are very
people focused we love connecting with
people figuring out what people are
thinking and what motivates them so
going into digital marketing might be
attractive to enfps but because of the
way that the internet works these days a
lot of the job of a digital marketer is
spending a lot of time looking at
spreadsheets that go over seo
optimization and figuring out the
analytics of what's performing and
what's not performing and a lot of the
job is very technical and i have seen
this in the people that i know who do go
into digital marketing and it's not that
you couldn't do this job as an enfp i
just think that it's one where what we
think of when we think of this job is
something that's very exciting and
creative and interesting but what it
actually is is a lot of analytics which
aren't as interesting for us generally
right
so i'm going to contrast this enfp bad
job with an enfp good job which i think
is probably more aligned with what we're
dreaming of if we want to go into
marketing and that is content creation
so i think that being a content creator
is an excellent job for enfps in the
digital age and of course this depends
on what type of content you're creating
so ideally this would be an opportunity
for you to take whatever topic it is
that you are super obsessed with because
again if you lead with extroverted
intuition you are a giant nerd who has a
whole bunch of different interests and
different theories that you love wading
through and if you can find someone who
will hire you to communicate what you
know about those theories in an engaging
and fun way that is going to be a
supernatural fit for your skill set
right so i have worked in
myriad capacities as a content creator
obviously i currently run a youtube
channel i was also a staff writer at a
publication in the past where i had to
write three articles a day on any topic
of my choosing the company was super
corrupt but the job itself i loved i've
done a lot of work in the course
creation field so i've helped other
people i've helped companies create
courses and find ways to take
information that you would think of as
kind of dull and uninteresting and put a
really creative spin on it and find a
way to explain it to people in a way
that keeps them engaged and i think that
a theme you will see pop up over and
over again in this video is just a love
of learning and a love of communicating
information if you are an enfp these are
two things that you naturally not only
gravitate towards but excel at and i
think that anytime you can center those
things in your work you're going to feel
naturally energized by the work that
you're doing right ongoing learning
ongoing communication of ideas is where
the enfp shines bad job number six for
the enfp being in the military so this
is one that i do often see listed as a
bad job for enfps and i have to agree um
being in the military is all about
following rules to a t it's all about
having your day planned for you usually
by someone else and you are not
encouraged very often to be creative
take creative liberties think outside
the box the military is just not the
place for that i think that it's
stereotyped as like an istj estj career
being in the military and i agree i
think that
s.i dominant types or si users do really
well with the highly structured nature
of the military but i also think that
stps do really well in the military
because there are different roles that
require a lot more like in the moment
moment-to-moment adaptation and quick
response time and i think that istps and
esdps really excel at that two of my
families are in the military one's an
istp one's an istj and both of them love
it for very different reasons but i see
both of them really thriving in that
environment but i think that that's
probably
the worst possible environment for an
enfp who really likes to think
autonomously bend the rules be creative
with what they're doing on a day-to-day
basis it's not that there's anything
wrong with the way the military's
structured we need it to be structured
that way right but i think it does not
naturally fit with the way that the enfp
likes to operate so career number six
that i would recommend for the enfp is
being a coach of pretty much any sort so
i think it can be a very natural fit for
enfps to go into any sort of coaching
that allows people to live a better life
so whether that is holistic health and
wellness whether that's business
coaching whether that is kind of more
general life coaching i think that enfps
are such naturals at gaining new
information and understanding new
systems and then again coaching is just
the process of being able to communicate
different modalities different ways of
thinking different ways of approaching
your life effectively to other people
and of course because enfps are such
people people it can feel really
exciting to have conversations
constantly with people where you are
helping them understand themselves and
their lives and how to approach their
lives more effectively i think that we
naturally spend so much time thinking
about that like an almost obsessive
amount of time and we don't always
realize that like not everyone puts that
much thought into how to structure their
lives in a way that really works for
them and i also think that enfps tend to
put a lot of thought into how people are
different right so you're not going to
be the kind of coach who tries to treat
every client you have as the same person
and get them to implement the same
strategies we are really good at
recognizing the biodiversity between
people and helping people find the
approach that's going to work best for
them in whatever field it is that we've
chosen to specialize in plus we are just
very excitable people generally like we
get pumped up when we're talking about
topics that excite us and that energy
can be contagious if that is what the
client is looking for so of course
client coach fit is always going to be
important but i think that coaching is
another career where the enfp's natural
interests and energy and skill set is
really able to shine in job number five
that i often see not recommended for
enfps and i'm going to take a little bit
of issue with this
when you search bad jobs for enfps you
get a ton of stuff that's like
financial advisor accountant right
anything related to finances and it's
not that i think that financial jobs are
necessarily like the best choice for
enfps i definitely don't think
that's the kind of career path that's
going to like light us on fire but
it is kind of just using our tertiary te
and by the way if you don't know what
i'm talking about when i say terms like
extroverted intuition extroverted
sensing extroverted thinking dominant
auxiliary tertiary cognitive function
i'm talking about the areas of your
brain that you use to process
information make decisions process your
emotions and deal with your external
environment as an enfp and they do have
a six week soul boot camp course where
we go over exactly how the inside of
your mind works it's taught through a
series of characters that function kind
of like the characters in the movie
inside out so you can see very clearly
how the inside of your mind is working
and you can learn to make better more
aligned decisions for your life by
taking your natural tendencies into
account so you can find that course on
my website at
www.heidiprev.com i will put the link in
the description of this video and you
can go there to learn a whole bunch more
about your personality type now back to
careers so if you choose a career in
finance or accounting or whatever it is
it's not necessarily the worst choice
that you can make in my opinion the
worst choice you could make as an enfp
would be to choose a career that um
someone with extroverted sensing would
be more naturally suited to extroverted
sensing is your dead last function as an
enfp so what that means is that even
though we are very extroverted and
personable and outgoing we're not great
as enfps despite what many people might
think we're not great at dealing with
our physical environment
quickly on our feet in a high pressure
way so don't be like an air traffic
controller as an enfp don't be
like a skydiving instructor
if
you have a job where you zoning out for
a couple of minutes means that people
die
terrible choice for you as an enfp that
is the worst choice you could make is
any sort of career where you need to be
super present and super engaged 100 of
the time or else danger happens
um because again
extroverted sensing is the dead last
cognitive function in our stacking it is
number eight but if you're an esfp who
tests as an enfp because you took the 16
personalities test uh it's your first
cognitive function so
it's a bit tricky because um i think a
lot of people watching this video might
be like wait i really do thrive in like
high pressure like sensorly engaging
environments um that might be because
your true type is esfp but for enfps who
have a very strong tendency to zone out
thinking about different theories i
would not recommend you go into any
field where lives are on the line if you
stop paying attention for a little bit
that would be your worst choice
accounting might not be that exciting
but honestly like
i would put it in the
not great but i wouldn't tell you not to
do it category you know like there's not
going to be major consequences to you
doing this job it just will probably be
not super exciting job number five that
i would recommend for an enfp and i'm
going to kind of contradict what i just
said is being a wilderness guide
wilderness therapy general outdoors
men or woman outdoors person and i get
that there's the argument here that when
you're in the great outdoors you have to
be constantly on alert to threats
kind of um yeah you have to know what to
do if like a bear comes at you but i
have met two different enfps who do
wilderness therapy and i see them
absolutely thriving and i think that one
of the reasons this is so attractive to
enfps is because we get really
frustrated by the way that society is
structured
by modern life by the systems that we
have to exist within in order to
function in modern society and i think
that a life that is a little bit
disconnected from that especially a life
that allows you to approach mental
health from a more naturalistic lens
like there's a lot of research showing
that being outdoors being in the
wilderness really helps us restore our
mental health when we're suffering and i
think that enfps actually have
a bit of an intuitive understanding of
this often like i think that we are very
aware of what's helpful and not helpful
for our mental health like that's just
something we're very tuned into so i see
a lot of enfps kind of figuring this out
and going to work in more natural
settings and i see that being really
beneficial both for themselves and for
the people who they end up working with
i actually really heavily considered
going into wilderness therapy at one
point in my life it's a complicated
field because it doesn't pay very well
and it's very like demanding and it's
hard to have a normal life but
again
i would not say that
getting paid really well and having low
stress and having a normal life are very
high priorities for most enfps so there
you go it might be the exact right type
of pressure that we like and
with people all the time and you would
be helping people through really
difficult moments in their lives as well
because being out in nature provides
very intense mental pressures on people
it is a very different environment than
most people are used to so being able to
coach people through those kind of
difficult moments and help them build
resilience and have those really
core really
raw human to human interactions with
people i think is very very wonderful
for the soul and i think that enfps are
always looking for the job that will
feed their soul the most so that's when
i like never see people talking about
but i actually think it's one of the
best career options out there for enfps
okay bad job number four is one that i
see recommended on almost every single
list of enfp jobs and once again i think
that this is a fantastic job for an esfp
and a terrible job for an enfp which is
being a salesperson now it's not that
enfps can't sell things like i think
that on the contrary if the enfp really
loves and believes in the thing they're
selling they can sell it like nobody's
business but
because most sales are oriented around
like physical items and enfps are
probably some of the least materialistic
of all of the personality types it's
going to be very difficult to get an
enfp excited about selling a product
that
only adds to someone's life materially
right now if you're hiring an enfp to
sell like i don't know some kind of like
life-changing program that they really
believe in you're going to have more
luck but in general i think that being a
salesperson and trying to convince
someone to buy something
is almost um
like something that would go against the
moral code of many enfps who are very
very intent on giving other people
autonomy not wanting to influence what
they do like we are interested in
influencing how people are thinking
about life in the world but we're not
interested in like getting people to
spend their money in certain ways
necessarily
so i think that being a salesperson is
much more suited to someone who has
extroverted sensing and who really does
often see the value in a lot more
products and like the tangible benefits
that they could bring to people's lives
because they naturally orient their
attention in that direction but for an
enfp it's like
it depends what you're getting them to
sell but i found
more often than not the enfps i know
like hate selling like
loathe even things they believe in
trying to convince anyone to buy
something that they wouldn't otherwise
buy i think that's actually pretty
painful for enfps so wouldn't recommend
that one personally but with the caveat
that maybe it depends on what's being
sold however kind of related career
number four that i would recommend for
an enfp is working at a startup now
obviously there are about a million
different jobs that this could be
but i think that when it comes to
looking at the kind of workplace enfps
thrive in i think that bigger
corporations kind of big bureaucratic
places are really difficult for a lot of
enfps because their hands are tied in a
lot of areas and we hate our hands being
tied we really like being creative we
really like working on different things
we really like being able to problem
solve in a way that forces us to think
outside the box and when you're working
at a small company or with a startup you
usually wear a lot of different hats on
a day-to-day basis you're usually
empowered to be really creative and
problem solve and figure out different
ways of getting things done that make
life easier and that is naturally
aligned with how pretty much any
perceiver thinks right being in a
workplace where that is encouraged and
where we are actually appreciated for
that is going to be a lot better overall
for our mental health than being in a
workplace where it's discouraged to
think for yourself and it's discouraged
to come up with creative ideas and
you're kind of told to like stay in your
lane right that is what kills our soul
what ignites our soul is being able to
really have autonomy and really be able
to steer our work in whatever direction
we feel is most exciting or will give us
the biggest opportunity to grow number
three position i would not recommend for
an enfp is another one i see recommended
for our type on almost every list being
a travel agent so
i have worked as a travel agent and it
is hands down no questions asked worst
job i've ever had terrible job it is a
combination of
selling people on like flashy high-end
resorts that you know they're gonna go
to and just like not be happy in i mean
i don't maybe people are happy when they
go there but i personally just feel like
is having a room upgrade really the
thing that's gonna like make you come
alive as a person probably not so i'm
not super excited to like push it really
hard on you and also it's not recognized
when we talk about being a travel agent
that
you're not traveling right like enfps
love to travel we love to explore
different cultures and meet new people
and have new experiences but you're not
doing the traveling when you're a travel
agent you're just booking it for someone
else and also i would say
95 of the clients who go to travel
agents are not people who are doing like
super adventurous explorative trips
where you have to like research some
exciting obscure destination for them
they just want to like go to a resort in
mexico and there's nothing wrong with
that but it's not that exciting to spend
day after day after day booking people
in different resorts in mexico and then
managing all their travel details and
then they call you and they're all
stressed out about something and it's
your job to be detail-oriented on their
behalf that's like all the stuff we hate
about travel like figuring out all the
little details especially when we don't
even get the payoff of going on the trip
is terrible and it just involves so much
selling and so much bookkeeping and like
being a travel agent is not travel so i
don't know why people keep recommending
it to us it's like saying
if you like eating delicious food you
like being a dishwasher it's like no
that's the part that's annoying about
the thing that we like not the part
that's good about it so
don't recommend that career for you as
an enfp in fact that career almost like
murdered my soul because i just saw how
corrupt the industry was and i had to
knowingly screw people over financially
in order to
meet basic performance indicators at my
job like it was terrible terrible also
don't go to a travel agent seriously
don't do it maybe there's like some not
corrupt companies out there but the one
i worked for which is a very major one
probably like one of the biggest ones
out there
terrible terrible terrible
so to contrast that one number three
profession that i would recommend for
enfps is any sort of mental healthcare
worker so we already talked about
wilderness therapy but i think that
anything in the field of helping people
live better lives and manage their
mental health better is something that
enfps are very naturally suited towards
because that is where our interest tends
to naturally lie is how to live good
lives so being a social worker being a
psychologist or kind of anything in that
vicinity i think that enfps naturally
excel at and that we are doing a great
service to the world by going into
because again we are so passionate about
that topic and i think that there are an
alarming amount of people actually in
the mental health field who are very
uncritical about the mental health field
and enfps are incredibly critical in the
way that we think of mental health and
how to live a good life like i think
that we take a very zoomed out approach
to it and look at it through a much more
holistic lens than most other people do
and i think that the field of mental
health actually desperately needs that
desperately so i love anytime i hear
that indian fp is thinking of going into
the field of mental health or anytime i
meet someone else in academia who is an
enfp that just excites me greatly
because i think that we're so well
suited to this field and also this field
really needs our input so i think that
that is a great fit across the board
number two job that i would not
recommend for an enfp being a police
officer this is one that you often see
on lists of bad jobs for enfps similar
to the military it's just not the most
creative job now i do think there's
situations where we could bring
something positive to the field of law
enforcement like i think a lot of people
don't realize that day to day a lot of
what law enforcement is is dealing with
people in very high pressure situations
and enfps tend to be pretty good at
empathizing and de-escalating
high-pressure situations so it's not
that we'd be the worst fit but i think
the fact that we are enforcing uh rules
for a living might kind of grate on our
consciousness as the years go by
because again that's not our favorite
thing to do
and it's also once again a job that's
pretty suited to
high sc users so sp types of any sort
who are very naturally suited to like
responding to crisis situations that
might involve danger i definitely would
not say that that's where enfps excel so
i would not recommend policing or law
enforcement to an enfp job number two
that i definitely would recommend to an
enfp being a professor so on a lot of
lists i see teacher as a good job for
enfps and i don't think that's a bad job
like i definitely wouldn't say don't go
into teaching as an enfp but i think
that if there is a possibility to choose
what kind of teaching you want to do i
would recommend going into higher level
education as opposed to like elementary
education and the reason for that is
just that i feel like being immersed in
higher education means that you have to
continuously do more research and stay
more on top of what's going on in the
field that you're teaching and that is
again where enfps shine like we are
natural lifelong learners we devour
information like nobody's business and
we love to find new creative ways to
communicate high level topics in an easy
to digest way so i think that being a
professor is a perfect fit for an enfp
because we just love love love love
taking really complex theories
understanding all the nuances and then
translating them in a simple way there
might be some things that get
frustrating i know two enfp professors
and both of them i see struggling with
like the administrative stuff like
universities tend to be a bit
bureaucratic and there's like office
politics involved but i think that
overall the essence of the job is one
that is really well suited to the enfp
psyche number one job that i wouldn't
recommend to an enfp and this is one
that comes up on almost every list and i
agree with it is being an engineer it's
not that we couldn't do it we could do
it but i think that the thinking around
it is just so technical and
using ti is something that enfps really
struggle with so introverted thinking
which means understanding like technical
systems in a very complex intricate way
is not a skill that comes naturally to
us because it's not where our general
interest lies right we love figuring out
and navigating human systems like the
ones that you would be studying in the
field of mental health or even business
in a lot of cases i see a lot of enfps
going into business and enjoying it i
didn't put it on the list but i wouldn't
rule that out as a type of system we
might enjoy but yeah technical systems
tend to be excruciatingly boring to us
so i definitely would not recommend
engineering just because it is both
extremely high pressure in that you have
to learn so much information so quickly
to like go to school for engineering
right but
it's not information that we enjoy
learning so it's likely to be very
draining for an enfp who's trying to
pursue a career in that field now the
number one job that i would recommend
for enfps and this is so biased forgive
my bias but to be fair it's also on like
every single list that i've ever seen
for enfps is writing so enfps
spend their lives dwelling in the realm
of theories and possibilities and
thoughts about how to live a good life
and writing is a really natural medium
of self-expression i've noticed for a
lot of nfp types and i think that our
ability to translate the more complex
aspects of the human condition
into something that is informative and
also funny and also engaging for people
makes us very natural writers and there
are a million different ways to use that
skill set right so a lot of enfps go
into like copywriting i've done so much
copywriting kind of the bread and butter
of my career for most of my life was
working as a ghost writer so i spent
years and years writing scripts speeches
parts of books for thought leaders and
entrepreneurs and it was such a natural
fit for my skill set because i would
have to basically devour their entire
library of information
and then find a way to concisely explain
the most impactful points in a way that
would inspire large audiences of people
within like a five minute period right
and i think that
that is a very exciting type of writing
for enfps to do because we love
inspiring people and thinking about how
to get people to think differently but
you also see a lot of enfps writing
books i believe that uh glennon doyle
who wrote untamed is almost definitely
an enfp as is cheryl strait who wrote
wild and tiny beautiful things i would
guess that a lot of really brilliant
psychology writers over the years have
been enfps and i would bet a lot of
money that many self-help authors over
the years have been enfps as well the
field of information communication just
comes so naturally to enfps and i think
that i really see many of them choosing
the written word as their medium of
choice when it comes to expressing their
philosophies right because what is it to
be an enfp if not to constantly be
chewing on some new life philosophy that
you feel excited to share with people
and writing is a really great medium to
do that and it can also pay pretty well
and i think that there's this stereotype
that writing means you're always going
to be broke and you're never going to
like have enough money to get by but
especially in the digital age being a
really talented copywriter is actually
very lucrative being a really talented
ghost writer is extreme the most money
i've ever made my life hands down no
questions asked was through ghost
writing it is a very lucrative career if
you can work your way up in that field
there is a lot of money in writing if
you know where to seek it out so i
actually think that it can be a really
great outlet for enfps to do writing and
it isn't one that means you have to be a
starving artist for your entire life
maybe at some point i'll also make a
video on that like how to thrive as a
writer as an enfp
um let me know if that's content that
you guys want because i do get questions
about that sometimes but i'm not sure
how like in demand it is
anyways
that is my list of just some things that
i see online
getting recommended for enfps that i
would not recommend as well as some
things that i see recommended online
that i think are really great ideas for
enfps but again at the end of the day i
think that any
career that you have a strong why behind
like anything that you're doing because
you really believe in it and you think
the world needs it that is really going
to be the right career for you you know
because when we show up with enthusiasm
to literally anything even if it's a job
as an engineer or a military officer we
find a way to make it our own and really
shine at it so i think that
what you're doing is a lot less
important than why you're doing it as an
enfp and that is probably like the
number one piece of advice i would
actually give you if you're in the
career exploration phase as an enfp
what's the why behind what you're doing
because that's going to take you much
further than narrowing down like what
you believe the optimal job to be okay
that is all i have to say for today
thank you guys for watching this video
let me know in the comments what you do
if you're an enfp and what you like or
don't like about it i'm always super
curious in my book the enfp survival
guide i interviewed like 50 different
enfps about what they do for work and i
got some super interesting answers um
and once again before you go i want to
remind you that if you are in a phase of
your life as an enfp where you are
looking to align with your natural
energy and figure out how to use it more
effectively to get a life that feels
completely authentic from the inside out
whether you are at home hanging out in
your bed or whether you're at work or
whether like me you have found a way to
do both of those things at once
i do run a six-week enfp soul bootcamp
course that you can check out on my
website at www.heidiprev.com
i will have the link to that in the
description of this video and until next
time i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and i will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]
you