hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we talk
quite a bit about how to have healthier
relationships with ourselves and other
people and today I want to talk about a
topic that has been a very Buzzy word on
the internet I would say this week but
for quite some time before this point as
well and that word is boundaries so I
think that when it comes to boundaries a
lot of us are very confused about how
the term is being used in pop culture
lately so we seem kind of collectively
unclear about whether a boundary is
something that we will do whether it's a
way that we can ask other people to
shape their behavior and today I want to
talk about how I like to think of
boundaries so this is not the definition
of boundaries it's just the one that I
have found most helpful and most
workable when it comes to maintaining
the health of my relationships with
myself and other people so I remember
many years ago when I was kind of in the
thick of my attachment wounding I wasn't
really finding my way out of it yet I
was expressing frustration to the
therapist that I was working with at the
time that my boundaries were making me
miserable like I was like look I just
keep putting up more and more walls in
my life and I feel like I'm just getting
lonelier and lonelier and she looked at
me and went well your boundaries are
supposed to make your life better so ask
yourself what the point is of putting
these boundaries in place and how are
you actually going to use those
boundaries to get more of what you want
out of your relationships and to me that
was kind of a perspective shift at the
time I didn't really know what to do
with it because I didn't know how to set
boundaries from my authentic self and so
today we're going to talk about what
that looks like at this point in my life
I think of the term boundary in the most
literal sense possible which is
something that I like to do with
psychological terms when I notice that
the public is kind of running away with
them and making them mean a whole bunch
of different things I like to look at
the literal word that the term
originated from so if you look up the
word boundary in the dictionary one of
the first definitions you get is a line
that marks the limits of an area and I
actually love that definition when it
comes to our own psychology I like to
think of boundaries as the limits of our
own authenticity so if I am operating
within my boundaries I'm operating in a
way that is true to who I am I'm in a
place where I'm sharing myself
authentically where I'm being honest
about my reactions to things where I'm
letting other people know in a true
direct way what I am and am not happy to
take on and do and I'm not having to
alter my behavior in any significant way
in order to stay in relationship now
that doesn't mean that I'm not willingly
doing favors for people or finding ways
to show up for the people in my life but
if I'm operating within the boundaries
of my authenticity it means that I'm
doing all of that because I actually
want to and because it brings me a sense
of joy to be able to be there for the
people I'm close to not because I said
yes to something when I really meant no
so by this definition and again this is
not the definition it is a definition or
a perspective on boundaries boundaries
are not something that we need to set
they are something that already exists
all we need to do is be clear with other
people about where they lie and
sometimes the hardest part is being
clear and honest with ourselves about
where those boundaries lie so I like to
literally picture it like okay if my
personality if my authentic self were a
property my boundaries would be the
fence that extends around my property so
people can recognize what is my land and
what is theirs and a relationship
without boundaries is kind of like two
neighbors who don't know where one's
land ends and the others begins so when
I'm extending myself in a relationship
when I'm going too far outside of the
boundaries of who I actually am in order
to be accepted by someone else or in
order to please someone else or because
I feel like that's something I need to
do to stay in relationship not because
it's something that I feel aligned with
doing now I'm operating outside of my
boundaries I've gone past the point of
authenticity and now I'm in self-erasure
territory and again I want to be clear
that a lot of the time doing favors for
other people showing up and offering
support for the people in our lives is
within our boundaries of authenticity I
can very authentically very happily put
some of my own stuff aside and show up
for other people but as soon as I feel
like I'm over extending myself or I'm
saying yes when I want to say no or I'm
feeling neglected in the relationship
yet I'm continuously extending myself
and pretending that I feel happy and
good about that now I've gone beyond the
limits of my own authenticity now I'm
having to pretend and fake things to
stay in relationship with the other so
I've gone past my own boundaries the
function of healthy boundaries is to
keep a relationship running smoothly so
making sure that everybody's dignity and
authenticity is staying intact so that
you can have a healthy relationship of
equals rather than a resentment Laden
relationship between two people who feel
like they are not operating from their
authentic selves so this is why
boundaries make our lives better when
we're able to recognize very clearly
here's where I end and someone else
begins or here's where my willingness to
engage ends and my resentment begins
we're able to use that information to
come up with Creative Solutions for how
we can stay in contact with each other
without feeling that chronic resentment
so one last time boundaries are the
limits of our authenticity and the way
we use boundaries is to make it clear
where we end and another person begins
so that we're making sure we're always
operating from our authenticity and
keeping our own and other people's
dignity intact in relationship and
because this has all been very
theoretical so far I want to go into a
couple examples of what this actually
looks like in practice and I want to
note letting people know where our
boundaries lie is inherently vulnerable
in a lot of cases because when we're
setting a boundary when we're letting
someone know here's the edges of my
authenticity here's as far as I can go
without crossing over into resentment
territory or self-abandonment territory
we're letting them really see us and
understand what matters to us and a lot
of the time because boundaries are such
a Hot Topic online I see people giving
examples of boundaries and going is this
fair or reasonable to expect and when
you really look at the text or when you
really look at what that person is
setting as a boundary what it seems like
to me is that they're not truly being
vulnerable so if I'm telling someone I
need you to talk to me an X Y or Z way
what I'm leaving out of that picture is
the why behind that right when you speak
to me like this when you don't text me
back when we don't have good
communication I have a hard time feeling
authentically connected to you and when
I don't feel connected to you I don't
feel particularly happy or close in our
relationship and I want our relationship
to be close but it's inauthentic for me
to pretend that I feel close to you when
actually I feel like you don't really
know that much about me or you're not
taking that much of an interest in my
life Ergo I'm kind of past my boundaries
here I'm kind of in this territory where
I'm pretending to be happy in the
relationship because I want to keep it
alive but I'm actually not happy right
that's letting someone know where our
boundaries are it's not demanding that
they do something it's just letting them
know here's what I need to actually feel
happy and connected and close to you if
that's something you want too then here
let me open the gate on the side of my
boundaries and invite you inside and if
that's not something that you want then
we might need to renegotiate or figure
something else out around how we relate
to each other maybe we're more
acquaintances than close friends or
lovers because that's what works for me
given the level of communication that
feels authentic for you but all of that
is a pretty vulnerable thing to say
right letting someone know what we feel
what's authentic to us and what feels
like self-abandonment is pretty
vulnerable you're letting them see more
of you including what hurts you but the
good news and we're going to get more
into this is that boundaries are also
inherently self-protective so we don't
need to shame and blame other people for
having different limits on their
authenticity we just need to be aware of
where ours are and then we need to be
willing to show up for ourselves in that
way so if our inner child wants to run
way over the limits of our authenticity
and directly into self-abandonment
territory in order to be close to
somebody it our job to make sure that we
are reigning in that inner child so that
we are keeping them safe and this part
can be really hard and painful to do in
the short term but in the long term it
makes all of our relationships function
more smoothly so how do we set a
boundary how do we make clear to
ourselves where the limits of our own
authenticity lies and then how do we
communicate that to other people in a
way that ideally makes our relationships
function more effectively so there's a
series of questions that I like to ask
myself when it's becoming apparent to me
that a certain relationship might need
some extra boundaries and I'm going to
go over what those are using a couple of
examples so we can really walk through
them
so the first question is what do I want
from this relationship so why is it that
I want to set a boundary in the first
place we don't try to set boundaries
with people who we don't care about
right if I'm having a conversation with
someone for the first time and in the
back of my head I'm thinking I never
want to see or speak to this person
again I have no interest in setting
boundaries with them or making clear to
them all of these things about what
feels authentic to me and what hurts me
there's no point because I don't want
them in my life so if I'm needing to set
a boundary with someone there's a very
good chance that the reason I want to
set that boundary in the first place is
because I want to be in relationship in
some form with that person that doesn't
mean romantic relationship necessarily
it could be a friendship a family
relationship a professional relationship
whatever it is but making really clear
in my own mind in what capacity do I
hope to keep this relationship alive in
my life what am I hoping it looks like
on the other side of me setting these
boundaries getting really clear on that
is helpful because it helps us zoom out
and look at the big picture instead of
just looking at what isn't working we
need to be clear on what we do want and
what we love about that relationship and
why it's worth setting the boundary in
the first place so question number one
is what do I want out of this
relationship why is it worth salvaging
and if we were able to salvage it what
would that ideally look like question
two is what is currently in the way for
me when it comes to being able to have
that type of relationship with this
person so if I want a super close
connected friendship with this person
how is it possible that I don't have
that what's getting in the way of me
feeling really close and connected to
them question number three is what would
it take to get there so what would need
to change in order for us to move from
this place where I feel disconnected or
like I'm having trouble experiencing the
type of relationship I want to have with
this person and the place where we have
it and finding the answer to this
question is ideally a collaborative
Affair between you and the other person
but it doesn't hurt to ask yourself
first so that going into a conversation
with them you have a little bit of an
idea of what might need to happen and
you can contribute some potential
Solutions and then question number four
and this is where a lot of us try to
jump to immediately when it comes to
boundary setting but I find it's helpful
to kind of move here progressively is if
this person does not want to work with
me on collaborating towards the type of
relationship with them that I would like
to have what can I do to make sure that
I'm keeping my inner child safe so how
do I make sure that my inner child who
might be willing to run way past the
boundaries of my own authenticity in
order to stay in connection with this
other person does not do that how do I
show up as my wise inner parent and
negotiate with my inner child to explain
to them that we need to stay Within
These certain boundaries and that might
mean be feeling a bit of grief or pain
over the limits that we need to set
interpersonally if and when it comes to
that and the kind of Golden Rule to ask
yourself there is what would make it
possible for me to stay in connection
with this other person without feeling
resentment towards them so how can I
make sure that every time I see this
person I'm able to actually be present
engaged and not distracted by past
things I'm upset with them about or
whatever it is what relationship
structure would allow me to stay present
maximally alive and minimally resentful
every time I'm around this person so to
go over this I'll give a couple of
examples let's say that I have a friend
who is super flaky so we've made plans
together a couple of times I've gotten
really excited about the plans my inner
child has gotten all pumped up and then
the morning of they have bailed on the
plans how would I go about using this
model of boundary setting to negotiate
relationship Norms with this friend so
the first question I would be asking
myself is what do I want out of this
friendship and if I'm going into a
conversation with this friend this part
is going to be really important to make
clear because you want to have buy-in to
see if you're working towards the same
type of relationship or not so I might
start off a conversation by going hey
you are my absolute favorite person to
Adventure with and I really want us to
plan fun trips together to have a lot of
quality time together and I want to
check if that's something that you want
too
right so establishing whether or not you
have the same context for the
relationship and the same wants out of
it can be really helpful from the get-go
if they do want that same thing then
that's great and you can move on to
talking about how to make that possible
but maybe they don't right so it's
important to get clear from the get-go
to see if you're even working in the
same direction now question two what's
in the way for me so if this friend is
my favorite person to spend time with to
plan trips with to go on adventures with
but I'm having trouble spending time
with them without feeling resentful
because there's been several instances
where they've canceled plans last minute
that inconsistency is getting in the way
for me so I'm having trouble feeling
close connected and excited about the
friendship it would be dishonest for me
to pretend that that's how I'm feeling
when in reality I'm feeling a little bit
angry and resentful so to have that kind
of connection that we want where I feel
like we can plan things together and I
feel free to let my inner child get
really excited about those things I need
to know that there's going to be a
greater sense of predictability so this
might be the point where I open things
up for this discussion if we both want
that out of our friendship can we have a
conversation about what it would take to
get it back to that place where we can
trust each other maybe there's something
about the way that we've been going
about making plans that doesn't work for
them that they haven't said yet but if
we can open up a discussion about what
works for us both and what would need to
change in order for us to get to a place
where both of us felt very comfortable
then we can potentially find Creative
Solutions that work for us both maybe we
need to make the plans further in
advance or maybe less far in advance
maybe there's something they've been
resentful about that's been impacting
our Dynamic and that needs to be worked
out before we can get to a place where
we truly feel like we trust each other
so the question that you're playing with
here at this point in the conversation
is if we have this shared vision for
what we want out of our friendship or
out of our relationship how do we get
there in a way that feels authentic to
both of us and where neither of us feels
as though we're stretching ourselves
past our limits or abandoning crucial
parts of what matters to us in order to
please the other person so is there some
sort of way we can respect both of our
boundaries and keep our dignity intact
well getting what we want out of the
relationship sometimes the answer to
this is going to be yes and sometimes
it's going to be no so let's say this is
a conversation I have with a friend they
agree to everything and then continue
flaking on plans now what's clear to me
is that there's something that I'm not
in the know about right there's
something going on for this friend that
they're not comfortable telling me
that's impacting their ability to show
up in the way that they claim they want
to show up and at this point I need to
switch into inner adult mode and ask
myself the question how do I keep my
inner child safe inside of this Dynamic
so which limits do I lovingly have to
set for my inner child to keep her safe
if this is someone who keeps getting my
inner child's hopes up and then dashing
them and I were literally thinking of my
inner child as an actual child who I'm
responsible for caring for I would
probably stop making plans with that
person because I wouldn't want that
little kid to keep getting their hopes
stashed so maybe I would keep this
person in my life but I wouldn't make
plans that revolve around them right if
I'm planning a weekend away or an
adventure or a trip I'm going to plan it
either on my own or with someone who I
know to be more reliable and maybe this
friend is just kind of the friend who
you invite along if you have an extra
spot or maybe this is just a friend you
meet for coffee every now and then or
the person who you hang out with
spontaneously if you get a text from
them one day and it turns out you're
both free at the same time so you might
have to readjust the way that you think
about and fit this person into your life
in order to make sure that your inner
child is being kept safe inside of that
relationship and that is your job to do
not the other person's job it is your
job to manage your relationship with
your inner child and a big part of that
is going to be managing your
relationships with other people in such
a way that your feelings are not
chronically getting hurt because you're
putting Protections in place to make
sure that that's not happening any more
than it has to so we'll do another
example and this time I'll use a
romantic relationship so let's say
you're getting close to someone who
you've been dating for a little while
but every time there's a conflict or
something stressful comes up in the
relationship you notice that they start
kind of stonewalling you or giving you
the silent treatment and they won't talk
about things with you how would we run
this through the kind of boundary model
so first of all you want to recognize
where you are outside the limits of your
authenticity here so if my partner is
speaking to me in a way that I find
insulting or unkind pretending that I'm
happy in the relationship is probably
outside the limits of my authenticity
I'm not being true to myself or to them
if I'm pretending that the way that
they're speaking to me is fine when in
reality it's hurting my feelings so what
I want to ask myself first is what do I
want from this relationship is this
someone who I want to continue getting
closer to what do I like about them
what's working in the relationship and
what would I like to preserve ideally I
also want to make that clear to them
then I want to ask myself what's getting
in the way of that what's getting in the
way of me having a relationship with
this person where I feel like I can show
up feeling present non-resentful and
fully alive and engaged with them and
again maybe it's that sense of anger or
rejection that's overwhelmingly in my
awareness when I'm around them and it's
getting in the way of me being present
with them so that's something that it's
possible to directly communicate right
hey I want to feel really close and
connected to you and if there's
something that comes up that hurts your
feelings or that isn't working for you
in the relationship I want us to sit
down and talk about it and work through
it until we find a solution but I find
it really hard to have those types of
conversations when I feel like I'm not
being let in on what's Happening for you
in those moments I feel pretty rejected
I get my guard up and then it gets hard
for me to work through things so what
I'd really like is for us to find a way
to work through conflict that works for
both of us even if one or both of us
gets a little bit triggered what can we
do to make sure that we're not throwing
the baby out with the bath water and
getting into a kind of downward spiral
the second someone's feelings get hurt
so this is that step three where we're
opening things up for Creative problem
solving right we're letting someone know
where our limits are we're asking about
theirs and we're trying to see if we can
work together to find a way that we can
both show up in the relationship
authentically while solving the problem
so without either person having to
sacrifice something that's important to
them them or act in a way that feels
inauthentic which might cause resentment
and further disconnection down the line
so if they want to work with you on that
that can be a really rich conversation
right maybe there's some way you're
showing up that's triggering them or
that they're struggling to process and
if you're both able to be communicative
and flexible you can figure out what
works but if they're not willing to work
with you on that then you have to look
at how to keep your inner child safe so
if your inner child loves feeling close
to this person but gets really badly
hurt every time they feel rejected or
shut out or ignored or given the silent
treatment and there isn't an
interpersonal willingness to work on
that now you have to look at how are you
going to keep that child safe and what
adjustments might you have to make
interpersonally to make sure that you're
doing that so if this were a literal
child would you allow them to
continuously get closer to someone who's
super hot and cold who's warm one day
and then rejecting the next or would you
need to sit down with your child and
have a conversation with them about how
that might not be the best person to be
super close too but maybe we can have
them as more of an acquaintance and in
both cases What's Happening Here is
you're refusing to self-abandon so
you're refusing to go beyond the limits
that are naturally there for you when it
comes to what you're willing to do in a
relationship so again I want to be clear
staying within your boundaries and
staying within the limits of your own
authenticity doesn't mean that you're
completely inflexible or unwilling to
make compromises a lot of relational
compromises feel totally authentic and
actually pretty exciting like hey I'm
letting someone affect me a little bit
I'm learning through relationship and
I'm willing to both change and be
changed through relationships that's a
wonderful thing when it's healthy and
how you can usually tell if a compromise
is healthy or not is if you feel
resentment about it or not it feels
really good to give inside of healthy
reciprocal relationships so if I'm part
of a community of people who are
constantly checking in on each other and
doing each other favors I'm probably not
going to feel resentment if someone
needs something for from me one day and
I go give it to them because I know that
there's a sense of natural give and take
from the relationship and it genuinely
makes my life better both to receive
what other people have to offer and to
give what I have to give and know that
that thing is being received by people
so again boundaries do not mean shutting
people out it means keeping yourself
authentic and honest about what you like
to give and receive and what you are and
aren't willing to do without growing
resentful so if our boundaries are
working properly they're going to be
making our lives and our relationships a
lot closer and more connected because
people are able to understand who we are
what matters to us and which compromises
we are genuinely happy to make for the
sake of relationships but in order to do
that we have to be both vulnerable
enough with ourselves and other people
to be honest about where our limits lie
and we have to be willing to protect
ourselves enough to keep our inner
children safe and not let them run too
far past the limits of our authenticity
because they want to stay in connection
with someone so like most things setting
boundaries is complicated and it takes a
lot of self work to get right but at the
end of the day it is so worth it if what
we want to have is authentic connected
relationships with other people where we
can show up with total presence total
willingness and total joy to both give
and receive whatever it is that we want
to give and receive out of our
relationships all right that's all I
have to say for today on the topic of
what a boundary is and how to figure out
where yours lie as always let me know in
the comments what you're thinking
feeling experiencing as you watch this
video I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again super
soon
[Music]
thank you