hey guys heidi preem here today i wanted
to open up a discussion about something
that i think there can be some confusion
over in the attachment community and
just in general when we talk about
relationships whether that's romantic
relationships friendship family
relationships which is to what extent
should we be depending on our loved ones
okay so i feel like when it comes to the
word depend a lot of people are very
quick to go any dependence is unhealthy
right and i think that a lot of that is
a product of living in a very
individualistic culture particularly for
those of us who live in north america
where it's kind of preached that you
should be able to meet 100 of your own
needs and outsourcing any of your needs
means that you are weak that you need to
do self work and that you are
necessarily having an unhealthy
relationship because you're depending on
someone else to meet your needs now are
there cases where this is true
absolutely but i think that the way we
get into trouble here or the confusion
that often happens is when we start
mixing up the term dependency with the
term codependency right
codependency is by nature unhealthy
codependency is when you need your
partner or your loved one to feel okay
in order for you to feel okay right so
someone else's emotional state dictates
how you feel and when it comes to
relationships between two adults that is
not a healthy dynamic right we need to
be able to stay stable and regulated in
our own emotional system in order to
give proper support to other people and
we also need to make space for other
people to have bad days to be confused
to be moving through difficult periods
of their lives without that being a
thing that throws us off track so
codependency where you both need the
other to feel a certain way in order to
feel okay yourself is definitely not a
healthy level of dependency however
there are healthy ways to be dependent
on your partner and to explain what that
looks like i want to offer the example
of going into a job let's say you get
hired to work in an office and the
reason you get hired to work in an
office is because the company has needs
that need to be fulfilled let's say they
need their telephone to be answered
every time it rings okay so they hire
you to sit at the front desk and answer
the telephone now this company is
dependent upon you coming into work
every day in order for that need to get
fulfilled however that isn't necessarily
an unhealthy situation because both of
you are getting something that you need
out of that the company is getting their
phone answered and you are getting a
salary and presumably if you're taking
this job you have a need for money so
there's kind of this explicit agreement
that you can meet each other's needs and
you have boundaries around that of
course there are cases where you do not
have healthy boundaries in the workplace
but i'm going to assume for the purpose
of this metaphor that you do and so
because you have complementary needs and
because you have boundaries that allow
that situation to be healthy for both of
you it's very easy for you to be a
little bit dependent on each other now
this does not mean that your workplace
would fall apart if you quit right the
workplace could be fine without you it's
just that it's easier for you to be the
one who comes in and answers the phone
every day because you have grown
accustomed to it you understand how to
do it maybe you have prior experience
with it and this is not that dissimilar
to relationships right i think that
there are kind of one of two tricky
situations we can get ourselves into
when we incorrectly assess what level of
dependency we should have on another
person especially someone who let's say
we're in a romantic relationship with
and situation one is where we think that
there should be no sense of dependency
whatsoever right so thinking like i can
meet a hundred percent of my needs all
of the time is unrealistic human beings
are social creatures and we do have
social needs you cannot sit in an
apartment by yourself for the rest of
your life and have your social needs be
fulfilled it's just not possible you
also can't necessarily meet all of your
own sexual needs or intimacy needs and
those are things that it can be very
healthy to form a romantic relationship
around to make sure that those needs are
getting consistently met in a way that
is mutually beneficial for both people
and that part is really important
because that's where boundaries come in
so i think that the other area where we
get ourselves into trouble is if we
start to outsource certain needs to
people who did not agree to fulfill
those needs for us right so let's say
you sleep with someone a couple of times
and then assume from now on this person
is going to be available to meet all of
my intimacy needs but maybe that person
isn't actually looking for a monogamous
romantic relationship but you never had
a conversation around that so the
boundaries were not clear and anytime
that we are outsourcing our needs
without clear boundaries and
expectations set up we're gonna be in
hot water when you go into a job
interview you have to agree to the terms
of the job right so your employer is
likely to tell you here's what time your
job would start and end every day here's
the expectations that would be required
of you and here's what we would offer
you in compensation and this is also
kind of the way that we need to work out
at the beginning of a relationship what
we expect from one another and what
needs we are both able and willing and
happy to fulfill for one another right
you would not just show up at a job
because you wanted it and expect them to
give you money and in the same way if
you just show up in someone's life and
expect them to meet your needs without
them having agreed that they are someone
who is ready and capable and interested
and happy to meet your needs it just
doesn't make any sense because you
wouldn't be sure that your interests are
aligned right so it's unhealthy to
depend on people to meet our needs if
those people did not agree to meet our
needs if they did not show very clearly
either through their words or their
actions that they were interested in
meeting our needs and that there was
some sort of reciprocity going on but as
long as there's mutuality and
reciprocity there's no problem with
relying on our partners to meet certain
needs of ours two people who really like
sleeping together and really like
getting to know each other are probably
doing a pretty good job of meeting each
other's intimacy needs and that doesn't
mean that either one would not be fine
if that agreement stopped they could go
find other people to meet their intimacy
needs the same way if you get fired from
a job your workplace can find someone
else to answer the phone but again
boundaries are important when you take a
job for example you're allowed to take a
sick day if one day you wake up and you
feel like i am not up to meeting this
company's needs today you're allowed to
call in and take a day for yourself and
the same kind of principle should apply
in relationships right your partner is
also allowed to have sick days or off
days or days where they need to take
some extra time to tend to themselves
and where they're maybe not as available
to meet your practical or emotional
needs and like a company will have
people they can call in those situations
who can come in and fill in for the day
you also need to have strategies that
you can call on to get your own needs
met if your partner is not available to
meet your needs at a certain point in
time so let's say every day you come
home and you vent to your partner about
your work day and one day your partner's
just not up for it they're like you know
what i've had a rough day i need to
either go have a drink with my friends
or i need to go on a long walk by myself
and just blow off some steam in order
for your relationship to function
healthily you should have alternate
strategies that you can turn to if your
partner's not available in order to
soothe yourself but dependence itself is
not a dirty word okay when two people
show up in relationship and agree to
meet each other's needs in a healthy way
we call that interdependence and
interdependence is an incredibly
wonderful enriching fulfilling thing to
have in any relationship because it
means i'm fine on my own but
our strengths complement each other and
we can be better together we can lift
each other up and encourage each other
and push each other in meaningful ways
and that sense of interdependence can be
the building block of a very healthy
long-term romantic relationship right
especially when families come into play
and you have children with someone you
are often interdependent in terms of
resources so married couples very often
pool their incomes and decide together
how to spend money and where to live and
how to meet their survival needs for
themselves and their family unit and
again ideally if that family unit were
to dissolve for some reason both people
would still be able to meet their own
survival needs independently it might
take a little bit of time to figure it
out but they are for whatever period of
time they decide to stay together for
interdependent in terms of meeting
certain needs and that is a healthy
normal part of any relationship putting
your needs on someone who did not agree
to meet your needs is absolutely not
healthy but having ongoing frequent
conversations about which ways you can
depend on each other is 100
part of a healthy secure relationship so
don't freak out at the concept of in any
way being dependent on another person
that is a healthy part of the human
condition if you know how to do it in an
explicit way with clear boundaries you
probably wouldn't take a job offer where
you were on call 24 hours a day 365 days
a year could never take time off or
space for yourself and where you were
expected to meet your employer's needs
at the drop of a hat no matter what else
was going on for you and so that
shouldn't be the dynamic in your
relationship either right there should
be boundaries there should be allowances
for alone time and for self-regulation
time and obviously with work there are
cases where you can agree to be on call
and the same thing can go in a
partnership if your partner is going
through a rough time and you know for a
period of time i might need to be a
little bit more available that can also
be something that's figured out as you
move through it and that isn't
necessarily unhealthy but you need to
have those boundaries that everyone
feels comfortable within the same way a
work setting needs to have boundaries so
that its employees are not getting taken
advantage of so yes we should be able to
depend on our partners and loved ones
that's a beautiful part of life we just
have to be careful about having clear
boundaries and also understanding what
it is and is not appropriate to depend
on them for right so in a workplace for
example your boss might depend on you
for meeting the needs of the workplace
but it's probably not appropriate for
your boss to expect you to meet their
emotional or sexual needs unless you're
in the fields of like therapy or sex
work and in the same vein it's probably
appropriate for your partner to expect
you to meet their intimacy needs and
their emotional needs within the
boundaries that you've decided upon but
it's probably not as healthy or
appropriate for them to expect you to
meet their need for self-esteem right
that's something that's outside of the
bounds of social interdependence and it
really falls more on them to regulate
themselves in that area the same way
it's your boss's job to emotionally
regulate themselves it's your job to
answer the phone or whatever it is that
you've explicitly agreed is your role in
the workplace so to have a healthy sense
of interdependence we have to understand
what needs are important for us to be
able to meet for ourselves and then
which interpersonal needs do i need to
go to other people for and how much of
those needs is any one given
relationship capable of taking on and in
an ideal situation just like an office
has a whole bunch of different workers a
single person should have a lot of
different interdependent relationships
right most of us have family
relationships as well as friendships as
well as romantic partnerships and we go
to all of those people for different
things if we were to go to one person
for everything it would create an
incredible amount of stress on that
person right the same way it's very
difficult if you are the only employee
in a company and you're expected to do
literally everything it places an
unnatural degree of stress on you so
what degree of interdependence is
healthy within a relationship depends on
a lot of things but what has to be front
and center in our minds at any point is
what's my job what's someone else's job
and where is it healthy for us to be
interdependent because it's mutually
beneficial for us to be it sounds so
technical but like anytime you go to a
friend and you spend quality time with
them you're kind of having an implicit
agreement to meet each other's needs for
socialization right and it's a very
happy agreement usually that both people
benefit from and maybe over time you
start to become a little bit dependent
on one friend to meet your social needs
because you regularly see them but that
doesn't mean that you are going to fall
apart if they move to another city it
just means that for now that dependency
works and in the future if it doesn't
work anymore you can figure something
else out like everything context is so
important here right so don't feel like
you have to be so independent that you
never go to anyone for anything that's
actually what we call counter dependence
and it really works against our survival
needs but also don't feel like your
partner should be responsible for
meeting all of your needs a lot of your
needs are your own to meet and finding
out how to be in a healthy relationship
will be an ongoing lifelong process of
figuring out which needs do i need to
depend solely on myself to meet and
which needs can i be interdependent with
and that is just part of being a human
being but i just wanted to have a quick
conversation about it because sometimes
i will be talking about something online
and people will be like whoa whoa
depending on someone you can't do that
well you can if you do it in a healthy
way right your boss depends on you
showing up at work in the morning that's
a healthy sense of interdependence
because it's explicitly agreed upon and
the same can be true of relationships
you can have healthy dependence that's
been explicitly agreed upon that is not
codependence right
interdependence good codependence bad is
the gist of this video thank you guys
for listening to me talk that one out if
you have any questions or any comments
as always let me know below i'm always
super curious about what you guys are
thinking about all of these concepts and
until next time i love you i hope you
guys are taking care of yourselves and i
will see you back here again super soon
[Music]