hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about integrity and today in particular
I want to talk about
defensiveness so this is a video that
I've actually had in the back of my head
for a long time but I was waiting for
when it felt like the right time to dive
into the topic and this month when we're
talking about self-respect and how to
show up in a way that we're proud of
inside of our close relationships it
felt like the perfect opportunity to
find bring in the topic of
defensiveness now this is a topic that I
think gets a really bad rep somewhat
undeservedly so so very often if we're
talking about someone and saying that
they're very defensive or when we're
accusing someone of being defensive
we're kind of subtly implying that they
are being irrational or that what
they're saying doesn't really hold
weight and what I want to talk about
today is how to actually use the
experience of defensiveness to to our
advantage so how to stop or pause when
we feel ourselves getting defensive and
actually figuring out is there something
here that it's actually really important
for me and my Integrity to stand up for
so this is about transforming
defensiveness into
assertiveness and we're going to talk
about this at length in terms of what
process brings us there but I just want
to State off the bat that I think that
there's often very strong signal inside
feelings of defensiveness so I don't
think that we should instantly dismiss
them as being irrational even if we
recognize that there's something not
entirely rational inside of our thought
process around it so we're going to go
into exactly how to sort out what needs
to be kept and defended in a healthy and
assertive way as well as how to
acknowledge and admit to ourselves that
we might also have some muddle around
the way that we're going about arguing
our point this is the process of
figuring out how to not self- abandon in
the moments where we're not actually
sure what it is that we're feeling upset
about and I believe this is an
incredibly important skill for secure
relating so it's really worth it to
spend some time on this step one in this
process is just figuring out so that we
start to be aware of this in the moment
which signals show up in our body to let
us know that we are feeling defensive
and again when we're feeling defensive
this is not necessarily cause for us to
go okay time to shut down everything I'm
feeling and admit that I'm wrong this is
the experience of just being able to
recognize in a completely neutral way I
am feeling defensive so right now what
you can try doing is pulling into your
body a memory of the last time or a
recent time that you felt defensive and
just notice what changes happen inside
of your physiology as you're recalling
that memory defensiveness does look and
feel different to different people so
for some of us we might go into a total
shutdown response when we feel defensive
and kind of tell ourselves these stories
about how this other person could never
understand us so we're not even going to
bother but for other people it feels
really upregulating so when you're
feeling defensive you might feel this
mix of kind of panic and anger or maybe
you feel the really strong urge to
explain yourself and to tell the other
person as much information as you can
about what it is that they're getting
wrong and so what we just want to do in
this first step step is start becoming
aware of what happens in our body when
that feeling of defensiveness is
online and what we are not trying to do
is completely get rid of this feeling
actually we want to welcome it in so
that the next time we notice it showing
up instead of immediately switching into
whatever response we usually take when
we feel defensive whether that's
shutting down or lashing out or anything
else in between we can just name it for
ourselves in a neutral way we can just
tell ourselves I am feeling defensive
right
now and if we happen to be in a
relational Dynamic where it feels safe
to disclose that to the other person I
really highly recommend doing that as
well so just taking a breath and going
I'm feeling really defensive in this
conversation or I'm feeling a lot of
resistance to what we're talking about
in this conversation or the way this
conversation is unfolding or something
like that that gives you a moment to
kind of ignore knowledge where you're at
before deciding what to do next so I've
been on both sides of this equation and
I can say that from the receiving end
when someone tells me overtly that
they're feeling defensive it's actually
kind of like them putting out a safety
cone in the conversation because now I
know there's some heightened emotions
going on right so we're going to need to
tread a little bit more carefully but
again you're going to need to use your
discretion as to whether or not you want
to disclose that which leads into how we
want to step two step two of this
process is figuring out where both the
signal and the muddle is inside of your
defensiveness response so these are
terms that a close friend of mine always
uses that I find really really helpful
in navigating through these
situations so where is the signal where
is the part of me that actually knows I
need to stand up for myself here versus
where is the muddle where am I actually
getting a bit confused and making a case
that doesn't necessarily apply where is
my cause and effect reasoning not quite
clear here so this step can be done
interpersonally with the other person
you're in conversation with if there's a
high degree of trust there but if not
this might be something that you want to
ask for a couple of minutes to excuse
yourself from the conversation and kind
of sit with yourself and try to sort
this out and there is one question that
I encourage you to ask yourself when
you're trying to figure out where the
signal and the muddle is in your
feelings of
defensiveness and that question is what
would it mean if I were wrong about this
so if someone makes a comment and we
immediately feel like no you've got it
wrong I have to overe explain myself or
you have misunderstood me I need to
completely shut down what we want to
focus on is if this other person were
actually right about that thing even if
in reality we actually know for a fact
that they're wrong what would it mean if
they were right and I were wrong
and what that's going to help me surface
is the meaning that I'm making out of
their statement that is deeper than the
actual statement that they're
making so for example years ago I had an
Instagram account that was dedicated to
some writing that I was doing at the
time and my work started gaining some
traction and I started getting a
following on Instagram and I had this
one friend at the time who would always
kind of make jokes with me about oh you
know now that you're a big time
influencer and what was interesting to
me was that I didn't have any negative
connotation associated with the word
influencer I had friends who were
influencers and who did sponsored posts
and I thought good on them it's like any
other job but I got the sense that this
person was saying it in a slightly
derogatory way so I would always feel
defensive when that word came up and I
didn't know whether or not that was true
right I didn't know for sure if they
were implying something negative or not
but I sat with that question and went
what I'm making this mean is that they
don't respect my rights writing and the
fact that I share it online so my
instinct was to push back against the
label of influencer because I felt like
that didn't accurately describe what I
did in the sense of I just literally was
not an influencer I was not selling any
products but there is a subtext to it so
arguing back against the influencer
status for me was not just arguing that
I wasn't an influencer it was arguing
that I thought I deserved this person's
respect and those are actually two
separate
conversations so this is about figuring
out which things were lumping together
that actually are two different things
so clarifying that I wasn't an
influencer was one conversation but
talking to this friend about the feeling
I had that they didn't respect my work
was a different
conversation and so this is what we want
to do with this question we want to get
clear on what meaning am I perceiving to
be behind this question whether or not
I'm right about that so I find that very
often what happens when we identify a
person as very defensive is that we are
saying something to them that might be
kind of benign to us but that carries a
very deep unconscious meaning for them
that feels like an attack so for a lot
of us there are a lot of things that
just kind of feel neutral about our
personalities like if someone came up to
me and went Heidi you're pretty bad at
tennis right I'd be like yeah I am bad
at tennis I think I've played it like
one time in my life when I was 12 so I
would be very surprised if I went to go
play a game of tennis and found out that
I were good at it so the comment that I
was bad at tennis wouldn't feel loaded
in any way but now let's say I grew up
in a family where there was a super
strong tennis culture and everyone loved
tennis except for me I didn't really
like it but I felt like I kind of had to
play it to fit in with the culture now
if someone comes up to me and goes Heidi
you're not very good at tennis right I
might instinctively translate that in my
mind to mean Heidi you're not good
enough for your family right and so now
I have to start pushing back and
defending that actually I do know how to
play tennis I just haven't been out much
this year and I haven't been hitting the
courts but it's because work has been
swamped and what I'm actually fighting
back against in this situation is not
the original claim itself it's the
meaning underneath the claim I'm trying
to argue that it's okay that I don't
like tennis and I should still be
accepted but they might not have any
idea of that if let's say this is just a
coworker of mine who is trying to figure
out if I was going to be interested in
playing on the company tennis team so
these are the areas where I think that
we're most prone to calling somebody
defensive is when they have a very
strong unconscious interpretation of
something that we have almost no
underlying unconscious interpretation of
and that's very often where these big
mismatches happen so if we want to try
to be less defensive the first thing we
want to work on is getting clear on
which really heavily loaded unconscious
interpretations we have to fairly benign
comments that other people might make
but I also want to to point out that
this is not to say everybody else is
always operating in good faith so in the
second part of this video what we're
going to talk about is how to deal with
scenarios where it feels like maybe we
actually are being insulted by someone
they're just not doing it in an overt
way so an example of this would be if I
came from that family where tennis
culture was so strong and one of my
cousins who had a long history of
bullying me came to visit me in my
workplace and was joking with all my
co-workers about what a bad tennis
player I was that might be a scenario
where there actually is real signal in
the fact that I feel defensive because I
actually am kind of covertly being
insulted so what we want to do here is
try to get really clear on which
situation is which and in the second
part of this video we're going to go
over how to deal with every possible
version of that including versions where
we truly don't know if the other person
is mocking us or if we are just being
overly sensitive because we know that we
have a really loaded interpretation
around that thing but in this step the
only thing we're paying attention to is
what do I think it means if this thing
that this person is saying that I feel
defensive around is true what meaning am
I making out of it we have to get to
that meaning or else we can't do the
rest of the steps in this process
another example of this to give some
varieties when I was in university I
remember the first time my father who is
a very cleanliness is Next to Godliness
kind of person came to visit me he
immediately kind of walked through my
house and started pointing out all of
the places where I was not being tidy
and making a lot of comments about the
mess in the place and I remember getting
really really defensive about that and I
didn't have the language for it at the
time but the meaning I was making out of
it was that if I am messy or untidy it
means I am lazy and I automatically
assumed that that was what he was
implying about my place and the truth
was that I was not lazy the reason my
place was not super clean was because I
was working three part-time jobs and
going to school full-time so I would
often work a midnight till 8: a.m. shift
and then go do a full day of classes and
then nap for a few hours and then work a
shift at my evening job and this didn't
leave me a lot of spare time to devote
to housework so the truth was that my
place was a bit messy but I didn't want
to be seen as lazy so what I immediately
started doing was lashing out at him and
I went well you have militarist
standards for cleanliness and no
reasonable person could ever live up to
that and making it all about him having
an unrealistic bar for cleanliness when
in reality there was both signal and
modle in what was happening for me the
signal was that I did want to be
respected and seen for how hard I was
working the muddle was that instead of
admitting yes my place is a mess but
there's a reason for that and I really
want you to see how hard I'm working in
these other areas and it hurts that you
aren't recognizing that I was trying to
convince him that actually my place was
not a mess and that was untrue so that
was the muddle I was trying to argue my
underlying Point by distorting my
surface level one but this is often a
really tricky thing to get clear on
especially if we grew up in environments
or find ourselves in environments where
passive aggressiveness genuinely is a
tool that people use very often to
communicate things they don't like about
us or that they wish we would change so
step step three in this process is
figuring out is the insult that I'm
feeling defensive about personal so is
this a way that I am judging myself that
the other person actually isn't implying
at all so this would be the case with
let's say one of my co-workers asking me
whether or not I was good at tennis and
me getting all flustered about it I
would be instinctively judging my worth
as a person around whether or not I was
good at tennis whereas it's likely that
my coworker was not doing that even a
little bit so this would be a case where
our feelings of defense and insult are
personal or is it interpersonal which
means is this person actually insulting
me covertly here which is somewhat often
the case right or is it neither or is it
both so we're going to look at what all
of these look like but first we just
want to note that the root to figuring
out which it is is through reality
testing so once we have surfaced that
story
that meaning that we're making out of
the comment that someone has made then
we just want to be clear with them hey
I'm interpreting what you're saying as
this am I getting that right or am I
making that up so if I had had the
language for it that time that I was in
university and my dad came to visit me I
could have said hey I'm interpreting
your critique of my house as you calling
me lazy am I right about that or am I
wrong about that or in the case of my
friend continuously lying that I'm an
influencer in a tone of voice that I
found kind of suspect I eventually went
up to that friend and said hey it's not
technically true that I'm an influencer
and that that's actually not my job but
I don't really have any problem being
thought of as an influencer but I feel a
little uncomfortable around the way that
you say it because I haven't heard you
in the past talk very positively about
influencers and so I'm wondering if
there's some judgment there or if
there's something you don't respect
about the fact that I put my writing on
the
internet and what this does is it gives
the person the option to do one of three
things one they can admit that Yes
actually I was kind of taking a dig at
you there I find this is pretty unlikely
it takes an exceptionally honest person
to do that but it is one of the options
or if they genuinely did not mean
something that way and it was a true
misunderstanding they can also let you
know that so that's usually going to
sound something like oh my God I'm so
sorry that is not at all what I meant I
really don't want you to think that
that's what I think of you right you can
usually feel when someone's being
authentic in that way and three is they
might deny it in a way that you feel is
probably not the truth so they might go
of course not you're just being too
sensitive right and give some sort of
dismissive response but the reason why
this is an important step is because if
it is a true genuine misunderstanding it
can stop here right then there's no
reason to continue defending the self
and you've just expressed something
vulnerable to another person because
when we explain the things that we feel
self-conscious about it is a vulnerable
thing and now they know you better right
so we want to reality test this at least
to rule out option two which is that
it's just a
misunderstanding but here's what we do
with the other things what we want to
figure out is the following we want to
look at am I feeling defensive because
something has poked at something in me
that I judge myself
for or is this something I don't judge
myself for so we want to clarify which
of those two things it is and then we
want to look at do I think the other
person is being genuinely disrespectful
towards me or not and this will give us
four different scenarios that we can
respond to in four different ways so
let's say in the influencer example my
friend goes oh my God no no no I'm so
sorry this is not at all what I meant I
actually think it's really cool and I
really respect your work now what we
have is a misunderstanding I respect
myself and they respect me so in that
case we can probably patch it up pretty
easily laugh it off and now maybe they
have a little bit more information about
the fact that I do sometimes get judged
for that and maybe that's something they
didn't know but what happens if I do
that same reality testing and I get the
same response from them that oh my God
that's not at all what I meant but I
realize I still feel kind of agitated
that they noticed that this is something
that I do and that they use that label
maybe it turns out I actually have a
problem with that label and there's
something they're pointing out that I'm
actually mad at myself for now we're in
a situation where I don't respect myself
but the other person does and in this
case what we probably want to do is
apologize for having projected that onto
them and then look at how we want to
heal our own self- relationship with the
part of us that judges oursel whether
that means changing what we do or just
becoming more comfortable and accepting
of something that we do but let's say I
don't get that totally understanding and
apologetic second response from people
where genuinely do respect me let's say
I get one of the other responses so
either yeah I actually was insulting you
and the meaning that you're making out
of that statement is correct again you
don't get a lot of this but it might
happen or someone dismissing your
meaning making and acting like you're
crazy or of course they didn't mean that
but in a way where you're not fully
convinced so now you're in a scenario
where if you have self-respect around
the thing that you think this person is
insulting you for but they don't seem to
be respecting you you want to look at
which boundaries you can draw around
this and what I found is that in
scenarios where people are doing that
kind of denial game but I don't really
believe it it's really helpful to treat
it as though it's in this category and
say even as a hypothetical okay I
appreciate that you weren't trying to
insult me but just so you know if you
really did disrespect what I did that
would be a pretty big issue for me and
our friendship because I respect what I
do and I feel really uncomfortable if
you're kind of mocking me around this
thing and even if it's phrased as a
hypothetical and even if they dismiss
you as being overly sensitive they will
hear the boundary that you're putting
down that doesn't necessarily mean
they'll respect it in the future but
people hear us when we set boundaries
even in hypothetical forms and now they
understand if I continue behaving in
this way this person is not going to
find it funny and they are going to
stand up for themselves assertively and
then if it happens again the
conversation might need to happen again
right I don't feel comfortable with the
way that you bring this up or I don't
find that joke is funny could you please
stop making it this is healthy
assertiveness you're addressing the
subtext of what's being said even if
it's just hypothetically and letting
them know in a hypothetical situation
where that is what you mean I'm not here
for it and I will not take that kind of
treatment and this this is going to get
you a lot further in the long run than
arguing back endlessly against the
surface point if you believe that there
truly is a subtext and of course if they
admit that there is one then it's time
to draw some explicit boundaries I'm not
okay with you talking about my house
like this I understand that you think
it's messy and it's not up to your
standards but I have a lot on my plate
this isn't something that I think is a
priority for me to attend to and quite
frankly I'm not going to want to have
you over if you're just going to come
and criticize the way that my place
looks so this is where we need to get
clear about our boundaries and stand up
for ourselves and the part of us that
feels put off and defensive in a clear
and assertive
way and then we're going to look at the
last quadrant so what if you surface
that the other person is insulting you
around something that actually you also
feel a lot of Shame around and that you
don't respect yourself for this is the
quadrant where we have two harms that we
need to attend to not zero so sometimes
we're quick to go well they're kind of
disrespecting me around this but I also
don't respect myself around this so
those cancel each other out and I should
just leave it alone in reality what we
want to be doing is attending to both so
this is where we have a conversation
about how to talk about this thing so
let's say I have made it clear to my
friend that I don't really respect the
work that I do but then they also start
making fun of my work in front of other
people and maybe I'm uncomfortable with
that in this case it's time to have a
conversation with this friend about how
to talk about the issue hey I know that
I complain about my work and I don't
really like it and I feel kind of
embarrassed about what I do but I don't
appreciate you making jokes about it in
front of other people that feels really
crappy to me and sometimes you surface
some really important things out of this
right maybe you are endlessly
complaining about your work to your
friend and they're getting frustrated
because they feel like they're putting a
lot of time and energy into to trying to
help you sort out the problem but you're
not taking action on it and so maybe
these quips that they're making are
their way of kind of venting some
frustration about the fact that they
feel like their listening skills are
being taken advantage of by you so this
can Surface some really interesting
things that might be happening under the
surface of the relationship Dynamic if
you can address it directly another
example of this Dynamic that I find is
fairly common is let's say you are
making relationship decisions that you
know are not great for you or that are
not not really coming out of a place of
self-respect and you're telling your
friends about it and then the next time
you go to them and you're like ooh
actually I haven't taken any of their
advice or done any of the things that I
said I would do to set boundaries in my
relationship and then them just asking
hey how's your relationship going can
put you instantly on the defense because
them asking that question to you might
have a subtext that goes if I have not
taken their advice or implemented what I
said I was going to implement it means
that I am pathetic or unworthy or
whatever it is and this is a case where
you might need to approach that
conversation with just as much
transparency as possible I'm
disappointed in the way that I'm acting
around this and I don't really know why
I keep acting this way around this and I
know that you guys are probably
frustrated too so let's talk about how
we can talk about this issue in a way
that isn't making both of us perpetually
frustrated right you bring the elephant
into the room but the thing that's
really important here and what we just
want to make sure we are paying
attention to is where there is signal
inside of our feelings of defensiveness
usually when we get defensive it's
because there is a part of us that
genuinely wants us to stand up for
ourselves we just aren't super clear on
what that part is and where it's getting
confused inside of the scenario so we
have to make that explicit separate
what's different about the conversation
we're having and the meaning that we're
making out of it reality testing whether
that meaning is actually being implied
in the conversation or not and then
responding accordingly by being
assertive in the right area that
actually gets at the core of what's
Happening under the surface of our
conversations and the more comfortable
we get doing this the less defensive we
naturally become and the more clean and
clear we start getting on what these
underlying Dynamics in our relationships
that we might feel so perpetually
frustrated by are and how we can address
them more often at the
root all right that's all I'm going to
say for today on this topic as always
any questions thoughts comments you guys
have coming up as you've gone through
this video do leave them in the comment
section below I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]