hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we talk
about a lot of different psychological
models or terms that we can use to
understand ourselves and other people
better and today the term that I want to
talk about is the term emotional
self-containment so this is a term that
gets used quite frequently when we talk
about emotional health about relational
Health but anytime there's kind of a
buzzy term like this I like to sit down
and have a conversation about what it
actually means as well as how we can
implement it in order to get the most
out of it because terms like
self-containment are really important
ones that can tell us a lot about how to
regulate our emotional experience so to
start us off let's Dive Right into what
does the term self-containment mean this
is once again one of those terms where
if you Google it you will get about a
thousand different definitions so I'm
going to start us off with my own
operational definition of this term that
I'm going to use in this video I think
of the term self-containment as the
ability to stay present with our
emotions both positive and negative and
everything in between without needing to
distort or detach from them in any
significant way so that means
experiencing our emotions without
following the instinctive urge to either
amplify our experience of them or detach
or dissociate from our experience of
them and for a lot of us especially
those of us who grew up insecurely
attached or who have past trauma there
is a process we need to go through in
order to learn to tolerate strong
emotions without either amplifying or
detaching from them so the ideal thing
that happens in childhood is that our
parents learn to contain our strong
emotions for us and mirror them back to
us accurately so what that would look
like is as a child if you have some
particularly strong feeling whether
that's anger sadness Joy excitement
whatever it is your caregiver or some
other mature adult is going to be able
to create a safe and environment in
which you can express that emotion
exactly as you feel it without them
becoming dysregulated by your display of
emotion and then once you've had the
chance to kind of let it out they're
going to be able to help you name and
make sense out of what you're feeling or
in some cases maybe the feeling just
needed to come out and that was enough
and you could go back to playing happily
however as you know if you've been
watching this channel for a while not
all of us grew up with ideal caregiving
environments now this doesn't mean that
our parents were trying to do things
wrong it may have meant that they just
had blind spots in their own emotional
processing that didn't allow them to
properly hold space for or respond to
our big emotions in childhood in the way
that we would have needed for us to feel
contained around those emotions so when
a parent creates a safe container for a
child to feel their big feelings inside
of the child feels as though they can
kind of let go and let it all out and
someone is going to come in after the
fact and help them put the pieces back
together and return to equilibrium
if this is not the experience you have
one of a couple of things might happen
one you might learn my parent will
respond and contain my emotional
experience only if I make it seem about
five times as bad as it actually is
because it's kind of hard to get their
attention because they're busy they have
multiple jobs there are multiple kids in
the house they're a little bit
emotionally unavailable whatever it is
and in this type of caregiving
environment you might automatically
learn to amplify your emotional
experience and this is going to be
something that you do well into
adulthood if it's what worked for you as
a child and there was no significant
change in that process for you the other
option is that if your displays of
strong emotion reliably did not get you
comfort or support in any capacity from
a caregiver you might err on the side of
detaching from or dissociating from your
strong feelings when they come up
because your brain learned from a young
age expressing my feelings to other
people doesn't really help me and if
anything it might make my situation
worse if for example your strong display
of emotion predict dysregulated your
caregiver there might be this automatic
sense of as soon as a strong feeling
comes up you've got to push it down
because expressing it is only going to
make everything worse there is not going
to be a contained environment for it at
any point so if either of these
situations were the case and you did not
learn that expressing your emotions
exactly as they are without any form of
distortion would lead to a sequence of
events in which you would eventually
achieve a greater understanding of your
feelings and things would change for the
better in your environment you're now
going to have two major things happening
every time a strong feeling comes online
for you you're both going to be
experiencing the feeling and you're
going to be experiencing a feeling about
the feeling based on your early
experiences of what would happen when
those feelings came up so we can call
this feeling about the feeling a meta
feeling but I also find it helpful to
think of this through the language of
triggers now when I use the word trigger
here I'm not referencing the official
classification of the term which relates
to PTSD I'm I'm talking about the more
kind of common pop culture definition of
the word trigger which people tend to
use to reference situations in which
they're having a very strong kind of
seemingly out of control emotional
reaction to something so the way that I
like to think of the term trigger is
that it's an emotion that arises in our
system that we don't know how to contain
so the meta feelings that we have about
that feeling tend to be very big and
very panicked in some capacity the
feeling might be anger The Meta feeling
might be Panic so instead of just
expressing the anger this feeling of
panic that comes to kind of fuse with it
might cause us to either amplify the
anger and make it about 10 times as
strong as it originally was when it
arrived in our body because that's the
only way we think it's going to get
heard or it might cause us to completely
shrink that anger away and push it down
inside of ourselves to the point where
we don't even consciously experience it
or know that it's there and this often
looks like in either activated
attachment system or a deactivated
attachment system and I want to be clear
that it might not be anger for you it
might be sadness that causes some sort
of meta reaction it might be need or
vulnerability or hurt there is no limit
to which emotions trigger these meta
feelings and this sense of I'm unable to
contain this emotion is going to be
different person to person and early
environment to early environment and it
never hurts to mention that no two
children even if they grew up in the
same family grew up in the exact same
caregiving environment so you might have
one sibling who feels as though they
can't express anger at any cost and
another who feels as though they can't
express sadness at any cost and then
maybe another one who's secure these
variations absolutely can happen within
a single family unit but the point of
all of this is that to have a feeling
that we don't know how to contain means
to have a feeling that we have a very
strong intense meta feeling around when
we do not have a meta feeling that comes
online to cover up our expression of an
original feeling what we can do is just
Express the feeling knowing that we are
capable of containing it for ourselves
and making sense of it so what we're
going to talk about through the rest of
this video is how to do the process of
emotional self-containment particularly
if it's not something that you have seen
modeled for you in your early
environment or if you did not have an
adult who is able to help you sort
through your feelings when you express
them cleanly at the exact amplitude that
you originally felt them in your body so
how do we create a container for our
strong emotions as adults my favorite
definition of an emotional container
that I heard one time was that what it
is is a sense of predictability around
what will happen if we express or allow
ourselves to feel a given emotion so
this is a sense of predictability that
we can create for ourselves with
intentional effort in adulthood now of
course if we're expressing our feelings
to other people or if we're doing
interpersonal processing we're not
always going to be able to predict or to
control how the other person is going to
respond so when it comes to the feelings
that we struggle to contain or that we
know tend to get really big really
quickly or really repressed really
quickly inside of us we're going to want
to practice emotional containment in
controlled environments before we try to
practice it in the wild we need to give
our bodies and our nervous systems
examples or blueprints of times when
those scary emotions have Arisen inside
of us and we have learned to regulate
through them the more instances of this
we can give ourselves through practicing
it in predictable environments the more
our bodies begin to internalize I don't
need to panic when this emotion comes up
I can feel it I can express it and I can
let go of my attachment to outcome
around it however in the early stages
you actually do want to make sure that
you're controlling for outcome a little
bit and we're going to talk about how to
do that in a way that does not involve
controlling or manipulating the behavior
of other people so step one in the
process of learning Emotional Self
payment is deliberately seeking out safe
controlled and predictable environments
within which you can express your strong
emotions so what might that type of
environment be it might look like a
therapeutic setting where you're working
with someone who is specifically trained
to contain your strong emotions for you
the way that ideally a caregiver would
have been able to do for you at a young
age it might look like going to a
support group or a 12-step group where
you have a designated period of time
where you can share what you're feeling
and there are specific rules about how
other people can respond to you within
that period of time so for example I
know a lot of 12-step groups including
ones that specifically address
relational problems have a no crosstalk
rule which means when someone shares
their experience or shares what they're
going through nobody else is allowed to
directly respond to it and while this
might feel kind of weird at first it's
important to note that what this is
doing is creating a sense of familiarity
and predictability within your nervous
system particularly if you're someone
who is worried that your emotional
expression is going to disregulate other
people so this might be people more on
the avoidant side of the spectrum but
not necessarily it can actually be
really healing to be in an environment
where you're able to express yourself
fully and other people do not have any
overt reaction to that but the important
part here is that whichever environment
you find to start practicing emotional
expression within you have a sense of
predictability around it you know what
is going to happen and if you're unsure
let's say you're having a consultation
with a therapist and you're not sure
what they would do if you were to
express a strong feeling of anger or
grief or whatever it is that you're
afraid of expressing to them you can
always ask them and be proactive about
establishing that sense of
predictability for yourself once you
have that experience of I know I can
bring my emotion into this space and I
have a reasonable idea of what's going
to happen as an outcome what's going to
become really important is noticing and
staying present with yourself as you
express that emotion I remember one time
being in a group processing call where
someone was experiencing a lot of Shame
and they expressed to the group I'm
feeling a ton of Shame right now
and I'm breathing and I'm noticing in
this moment that I'm surviving it and I
thought that that was such a profound
moment to witness and it became part of
what I adopted anytime I was
experiencing a strong emotion that
previously I was unable to contain I
learned very slowly to bring those
emotions into safe contained
environments and every time after
expressing them I would take a moment to
notice my breathing and say either out
loud or to myself inside my own mind I'm
experiencing this emotion and I'm
noticing that I am surviving it and that
might sound ridiculous but to the small
child in me who truly thought that that
expressing certain emotions would result
in complete abandonment and therefore
death ultimately which is how our child
selves process the fear of Abandonment
that became a very powerful refrain I'm
experiencing this emotion and I'm
surviving it and what's cool is that the
more we give ourselves the experience of
expressing our feelings letting them
come out and staying present and on the
page with ourselves and ideally with the
help of a trained professional or a
group The more we're able to stay
Associated the entire way through and so
the more we learn and notice that when
we express our emotions as they actually
are not as an amplified or dissipated
version of themselves those emotions
change sometimes we express extreme
sadness and then learn that we have a
lot of anger on the other side of it
sometimes we express a lot of anger and
then learn that we have a deep sense of
sadness or acceptance on the other side
of it and almost always when we're able
to stay with our true emotional
expression we eventually arrive at a
place where the solution to the problem
itself that was causing that strong
emotion becomes clear to us because
undistorted emotions give us important
information about reality and so the
more we learn to stay with them the more
important information We Gather for
ourselves about which actions we can can
take inside our own lives that might get
us more of what we want and less of what
we don't want step number two in the
process of learning to contain your own
emotions is learning over time to start
parsing apart your feelings and your
meta feelings and this takes time it is
the process of developing emotional
literacy but the important thing to keep
in mind is that often The Meta feeling
we have is a lot scarier than the actual
feeling itself so here's a very quick
emotional literacy 101 anger and disgust
are very normal feelings to have when
you're looking to protect yourself and
draw boundaries rejection and pain are
very normal feelings to experience when
you are falling out of connection with
someone joy and excitement and
enthusiasm are very normal feelings to
experience when you are feeling aligned
with something all of these feelings
including the wide array of other
feelings that exist out there are not
things you need to be afraid of or
ashamed of experiencing them them in
their raw form will allow you over time
to find the natural limits of those
emotions and I think that that is what
most of us fear when we don't know how
to contain our emotions if I feel Joy
and as a child that wasn't really
encouraged How will I know when I've
reached the limits of my joy I don't
know where the outside of this container
lies so I'm going to shove it down
inside of me anytime I experience it if
there's a part of me that gets angry and
I know that my judgment gets totally
clouded when I'm angry and I don't know
where the limits of my own anger are I'm
gonna once again panic and try to shove
that down anytime anger starts rearing
its head or on the opposite side of
things if I believe that I am not
capable of setting boundaries and I need
other people to set my boundaries for me
I'm going to need to amplify my own
anger so other people finally realize
that they need to change because again I
don't know where my own limits are so I
can't set boundaries around them most
emotions can be pretty cleanly processed
once we're clear around where their
limits are so it starts feeling safe for
your system to experience Joy if you
know without a shadow of a doubt that
you will be paying attention and you
will notice the moment that Joy starts
turning into pain right when the
situation that was once making you happy
starts changing if you know you can
trust yourself to recognize that moment
and respond in reality to it you're not
going to have a sense of fear around
your own Joy you know where its limit is
and you trust yourself to notice when
you reach it same goes for anger it's
easy to feel and express anger when you
know that you will be paying attention
to the moment when your anger ends and
your grief and acceptance of the
situation come back in and you know
without a shadow of a doubt that it's
now time for you to set your boundaries
it's easy to allow yourself to feel pain
and rejection if you know that you will
notice the moment where that pain and
rejection starts to end and your
experience of your own self-worth and
dignity comes back to you when we learn
to stay present with our emotional
experience we also learn to notice the
moments in which our emotional
experience starts to naturally change
the only reason this doesn't happen is
situations in which we tell ourselves
stories that keep the emotions alive
endlessly without any resolution and we
start emotionally responding
predominantly to the stories we're
telling ourselves about our feelings
because that meta feeling is feeding us
that narrative instead of actually
noticing what's happening in reality as
we move through that feeling meta
feelings come in and trap the expression
of our original feelings if I'm mad at
someone and I think oh no anytime I'm
angry it means something really bad is
going to happen instead of just
expressing my anger experiencing it and
arriving at the other side of it where
boundaries and resolution points are
clear to me I might keep it all wound up
inside of myself never let it out but
let it turn into a sense of chronic
resentment against another person or
into a sense of learned helplessness and
anxiety about my own ability to create
change in my life because if I'm never
allowing myself to feel my
self-protective emotions like anger and
to get to the other side where I can do
something meaningful with them what I'm
teaching myself is that I am not going
to take any sort of meaningful stance in
order to give myself the life that I
believe I am capable and deserving of
having I'm not showing myself a lot of
self-respect and a lack of self-respect
can bleed into a very strong sense of
depression over the long term so we're
going to move into slightly more
practical things with step three step
three is about proactively developing
emotional containers inside of your
everyday life so you need to show up for
your inner child and be the loving
parent that maybe you didn't have
modeled to you early on and show your
inner child how they can safely Express
their emotions without everything going
off the rails and things spiraling out
of control what this requires you to do
and this is so in important is not deny
or resist your emotions when they come
up inside of your body so if it is a
really bad time for you to be feeling
angry or a really bad time for you to be
feeling sad or whatever it is that's
okay you're an adult you can suck it up
for a little bit but what you do not
want to do is force your inner child to
suck it up forever again that is going
to cause them depression anxiety a whole
host of emotional issues down the line
what you want to do is give your inner
child a time that they know without a
shadow of a doubt you are going to come
back to that feeling and sit with them
inside of it for as long as it takes for
them to work through it this is going to
require you to do one of two things that
might be unfamiliar depending on which
end of the attachment Spectrum you're
starting from if you are more avoidant
this is going to require you to allow
your emotions to disrupt your life a
little bit it's going to require you to
go I had X Y and Z plan for this week
but now certain emotions are coming up
so I'm going to allow myself to adjust
my expectations for the week so that I
know without a shadow of a doubt I will
have time to be present with myself and
to feel my emotions as they're arising
in my body if you err on the anxious
side of the spectrum and your tendency
is to feel those emotions super super
strongly when they come up because your
system starts screaming attend to this
or else we're gonna die right which is
how our child selves process emotions
you're going to need to learn to get
comfortable with being the inner parent
who can tell your inner child I am going
to attend to this I am going to help you
be present with this and work through it
however maybe first we have to go to
work first we have to do X Y or Z but I
promise you that I will come back to
this here is the exact time and date at
which I will come back to this so a
couple of months ago I had a super
frustrating interaction one day I was so
full of anger that I like didn't know
how to get it out of my body and I
called up a couple of friends and I went
hey do you guys want to do a karaoke
night on Thursday I have some rage that
I need to belt out I got some buy-in I
booked a room I made a playlist of all
the power ballads I wanted to belt out
and it was incredible how much my inner
child instantly allowed me to
concentrate on my day-to-day life again
because she knew without a shadow of a
doubt I'd put a literal deposit on the
karaoke room that I was going to come
back and help her tend to her feelings I
wasn't going to let them slide but I
also wasn't going to let them completely
take over everything else that I had to
do that week so finding ways that we can
contain these emotions in a literal
sense by planning a time and date that
we're going to deal with them in some
way that feels cathartic and as though
we're actually able to express them and
get over them can be highly comforting
for our inner children and what I want
to be clear about here is that you don't
want to be doing activities that are
actually fueling your meta emotion
belting out your anger or rage at
karaoke or through a dance party or
through screaming into a pillow are all
somatic Expressions that get the energy
flowing through our body if what we're
experiencing is sadness the same might
be true of allowing ourselves to have a
day where we down regulate we take baths
we cry we allow the pain and acceptance
of what we're going through to filter
its way through our systems what we
don't want to be doing is telling
ourselves or other people's stories that
trap that emotion inside of us because
we're not actually letting it out and
exposing it to oxygen which is
vulnerable we're keeping it trapped
inside instead and again the way that
you know that an emotion has been
expressed authentically is that it
changes emotions that are let out
authentically by screaming when we feel
angry by crying when we feel sad our
forms of energy that naturally start to
disperse and dissipate and give way for
something new to arrive you'll know that
you're dealing with the direct real
emotion and not the meta emotion when
the expression of it naturally changes
it but this step is all about learning
to give ourselves and our inner children
the space to express their emotions
authentically and openly and to get used
to the feeling of having a direct
experience of our emotions without
fearing what's going to happen as a
consequence of them so to put this in
more literal terms some things that I
like to do if I'm feeling a really
strong emotion that I feel the need to
contain for my inner child I might call
my therapist and see if I can book an
extra appointment if I'm having a
particularly strong emotion I might go
to karaoke and sing it out I might talk
to a friend who I know is not going to
fixate on my meta emotion but is going
to allow me to just process in real time
the emotion that's actually occurring I
might schedule a self-care night for
myself where I just lie in bed and feel
super sorry for myself if I'm feeling
sad or a day where I run or lift weights
or belt out angry music in my living
room in front of the mirror if I'm
feeling angry all of these are means of
giving our inner children the space to
express themselves without fear of what
is going to happen because they're not
expressing it directly to other people
now this brings us to step four what I
am not recommending in this process is
that you never express your feelings to
other people I actually think that
interpersonal expression can be
incredibly important and in some cases
even necessary for exposing our emotions
to proper oxygen and allowing them to
change into something new it's just that
if we haven't learned to contain our own
feelings it's going to be difficult to
do it interpersonally from the get-go
but step four is all about learning to
take aligned action between our
authentic feelings not the meta feelings
because in the earlier steps we filtered
out what was what and our interpersonal
actions and we do this by starting very
small and then working up to bigger and
bigger steps so first we learn to
process our emotions directly in a
contained space where we know what is
going to happen and then we take small
steps to do this in slightly riskier
environments so maybe we move from
screaming into a pillow and letting all
of our rage out to calling up the person
we feel upset with and going hey would
you be open to having a conversation
where I expressed some anger that I've
been feeling so this becomes the process
of creating an interpersonal container
we're now not only letting ourselves
know what is reliably going to happen
when we express our feelings we're
letting someone else know we're letting
them know hey I have something I want to
express here's the kind of structure I
want to put around that expression so
that we both have a reasonable degree of
predictability about how this is going
to go and once again we want to make
sure that when we're entering into these
Dynamics we're dealing with the feeling
not the meta feeling so the feeling
might be I felt hurt when you said X Y
or Z to me the meta feeling might
incline us to tell the other person this
whole story about what we think of their
character and try to get them to agree
to it but that is not the feeling right
the feeling is hurt or it's pain or its
anger and if we want to give any of
those feelings the chance to see the
light of day and actually start to
change those have to be the ones that
we're expressing to people not the meta
feeling and all of the narratives that
arise as a result of it now I want to be
clear this is not always something that
you're going to want to do you might not
care to repair a given relationship so
this isn't to say that you have to do
this however if what you are looking for
is relational repair this is how we
start to inch our way towards it we
learn to get in touch with our feelings
find a way to feel them and express them
with our inner children in an
environment where they feel safe so they
know that we have at least heard and
listened to them and then if we choose
to take aligned action by expressing
those same feelings to other people who
we believe it would help our
relationships with to express them then
we do so in a way that is also
relatively safe and contained we do this
not just for the other person's benefit
but for our own because if we know
without a shadow of a doubt that we are
not going to run away with our own
stories and narratives we're just going
to express our feelings and that's all
we're going to do until we reach the
Natural end of that feeling and it
changes into something else like an
awareness of a boundary we need to set
we don't have to get panicked about
what's going to happen because we aren't
relying on distortions of the truth
we're just relying on what is
if I feel angry and I know that I just
need to see someone and go I felt angry
when you said this and that's the only
thing it's important for me to do in
that interaction I probably don't have
to feel too panicked about it I'm not
relying on the interaction going a
certain way in order for me to feel okay
I've already spent time with my emotion
accepted it soothed my inner child
around it gave my inner child the space
to express it and now if I'm bringing it
to someone else it's only to give myself
and them the opportunity to repair the
relationship between the two of us but
what I'm not asking them to do is repair
my relationship between me and my inner
child which is normally what we're doing
in interpersonal interactions when we
don't know how to contain our own
feelings right our inner child is
screaming at the other person because we
as their inner parent have not yet sat
with them and helped them work through
their feelings which kind of naturally
leads us to step five which is use your
self-parenting skills to slowly change
your experience of meta emotions over
time so we cannot remove the feel things
of anger sadness pain embarrassment all
of these gunky things that we might not
like feeling or Joy excitement
earnestness if those are the things we
don't like feeling lust sexual
attraction we cannot just take these
things voluntarily out of our awareness
or out of our bodies those things will
always pop up over and over again as we
make our way through our lives however
we can to a reasonable degree remove
those instinctive meta feelings of Panic
or anxiety or shame or self-disgust
about the fact that we are having a
feeling which might mean that those
original feelings no longer trigger us
so if I can dissipate The Meta emotion
of disgust or of anxiety that might
arise in my body anytime I start feeling
sadness then I might learn over time
that the more I express my Sadness the
more I let myself lie in bed or go to
12-step meetings and talk to people
about it or tell other people hey I'm
having a tough time right now I'm not
going to be functioning at 110 percent
the more I start to notice that
eventually the more I do this the more I
am able to actually accept and move on
from the things that cause me sadness
rather than letting them Fester inside
of me forever because they were covered
up by some other feeling the more often
the anger arises inside of me and I
don't immediately put a lid on it and go
that's not right for you to feel
or tell myself it's time to blow up and
express this all over anybody who will
listen without taking two seconds to
attend to it internally the more I learn
a clean expression of anger allows me to
let go of the outcome and not stay stuck
on wanting other people to set my
boundaries for me and so it doesn't stay
festered up and stuck inside of me it
becomes the thing that I use to inform
which boundaries and which structures I
need inside of my own life in order to
respect my own dignity what emotional
self-containment ultimately is is
cleaning up all of the meta emotions
that exist around our original emotions
so that we're actually feeling what it
is that we're feeling nothing more and
nothing less and we're able to be
present with that feeling for long
enough to watch it change into something
else and once we learn that that is a
process that's possible we don't need to
feel this intense fear or shame or guilt
out of any of our original emotions
around Rising inside of our bodies
because we know those things are not
going to get lodged somewhere deep
inside of me forever I'm going to
release them and let them change into
something else because I as my own inner
parent have created a safe container for
my inner child to express them cleanly
and clearly within and I've taught that
child over time what to do with those
emotions on the other side of them okay
I think that's all I have to say for
today on the topic of emotional
self-containment however let me know in
the comments what you guys are thinking
feeling experiencing as you move through
this process as always I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and your inner children
and I will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]