the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] keeps making that noise
wow i look pale hey guys heidi preeve
here i just spent like 25 minutes trying
to find a way to not look like a ghost
in this video and it's not gonna happen
first i thought it was because i dyed my
hair dark and then i thought it was
because the lighting was bad and then
finally i realized no it's because i
have copic i am currently ill and i can
only assume that my body is prioritizing
blood being sent to areas that support
the antibodies fighting the virus and
taking that blood directly away from my
face so this is what we get this is also
why at times it's probably gonna sound
like i just smoked like 12 packs of
cigarettes to myself anyway now that we
have that out of the way uh i wanted to
talk about something today that i think
is particularly a problem for a lot of
younger enfps so the older i get i think
the less that i personally find myself
struggling with making major decisions
because there is something that comes
with having the life experience and the
resource to change course if you make
the wrong decision that takes a lot of
stress off of decision making but
when enfps are young i find that quite a
few of us quite a few p's in general
probably fps more specifically
experience a lot of difficulty with
decision making like a very
disproportionate amount and i think that
one of the main reasons is because those
of us who use introverted feeling so
enfps infps esfps and isfps in
particular have this kind of constant
checking in that we do with ourselves
where we're always wondering am i okay
how am i feeling what is going on in my
inner world so if we stop feeling good
about a decision that we made or if we
wish that we had made another decision
it's not that we're going to regret
things in higher proportion than other
people it's that we're going to be a lot
more conscious of the regret that we
feel like it's going to be right there
on the surface of our awareness and we
are not going to give ourselves a break
from it so
this video is kind of how to make a
decision but i think more so the
important work lies in how to accept the
decisions once we do make them and how
to not spend half of our lives in these
alternate realities that we create for
ourselves inside of our minds where we
made a different decision and we think
that everything on that planet is better
and our lives as we are experiencing
them on this version of reality pale in
comparison in every sense of the word to
the alternate life that we could have
chosen maybe this should have been
called how to make peace with a decision
it's not as catchy though i don't like
it as much but anyways if this is
something that you see yourself in if
this is a challenge that you can
identify yourself struggling with we are
going to talk today about how to make
better decisions and once we have made
them how to not spend our entire lives
wondering what would have happened if we
had chosen something else i think one of
the first big mistakes that most enfps
make when it comes to making decisions
that they end up regretting is not
allowing ourselves enough time to try on
different options and see what feels
right for us right so a lot of feelers
in general i'm gonna say but especially
feeling perceiving types have been kind
of brought up to believe that anytime
they feel indecisive or like they can't
pick a path forward the thing they have
to do is just look at what makes the
most sense and decide on that at the
expense of their emotions now this is
how you make a good decision for a tj it
is not how you make a good decision for
a perceiver for a perceiver our skill
set the thing that makes us the most
ourselves the most informed the most
confident the most able to make the
impact on the world that we need to make
lies in our ability to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] around and
find out i love that i can swear in this
video because i just put the f word in
the title normally i like try to hold
back a little bit depending on what the
video is but uh no it's it's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
field day in this one if you are not
giving yourself the opportunity to
expose yourself to as many different
possibilities as you can within the
range of whatever it is that you're
trying to make a decision about you are
robbing yourself of the ability to make
a good decision okay because your
process literally involves figuring out
as much as you can about a whole bunch
of different areas and then tuning into
how you feel about each different option
and making a decision based on what
resonates the best in your body and your
emotional system which are the same
thing chances are if you are an enfp at
various points in your life you have
been taught that tuning into how you
feel and trying out different options
and then going with what fits you the
best emotionally is not the most
practical way to make a decision and i
am here to tell you that that is
absolute [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] for you the best
decision is always going to be whatever
decision makes you feel the most alive
the most excited the most energized
because you are at your best when you
are all of those things when you have
that energy that sense of purpose and
drive and passion and the desire to
actually be where you are and interact
with what you have chosen fully and
completely you learn better you work
harder you have the ability to produce
above and beyond results but in order to
do that you first have to set yourself
up for success by choosing the options
that you actually want to pursue and in
order to know what you want to pursue
you have to try a lot of different
things on for size so this is and will
always be the most important part of
your decision making process trying
things on and seeing what resonates
exploring different options trying
different things on for size as much as
possible and giving yourself time to
reflect on and integrate those
experiences until you're able to look
back on them and really tell which one
you feel more drawn to it becomes really
easy to make a decision because you're
actually feeling pulled towards
something and you can follow that energy
forward as opposed to seeing that
potential in 10 different areas and
trying to just pick the one that makes
the most sense so i remember when i was
17 and i was trying to choose which
university i wanted to go to school at
and
i had scholarships at every school i
applied to but won
and i had my best friend going to one of
these schools and her and i had planned
out our entire lives there we're gonna
share this apartment we're gonna go to
all the same classes we're gonna
graduate and get these like high-powered
careers in toronto which was the biggest
city that i could conceptualize of when
i was a teenager ironically now i live
in toronto and god i hate it there but
anyways i had this entire plan for my
life and then i decided something in my
gut was telling me like just go check
out a few other schools just despite the
fact that this one makes complete sense
in every way go
see a few other schools and see if you
like them and i stepped onto the campus
of the school that i eventually ended up
choosing and my entire body was like
yeah this is it we're supposed to be
here the energy on that campus the
beautiful old buildings that were all
over it the people who were super
friendly and relaxed and seemed really
happy to be there everything about it
was communicating to everything in my
nervous system that this is where you
want to be this place for whatever
reason just feels like home it was
suddenly a no-brainer because one place
had just resonated so strongly in my
body that it felt like there was no
question and
it's not always that easy and it's not
always that overt but i think that a lot
of the time we ignore that body
awareness as enfps because we've been
taught to not trust it but actually it's
that exact body awareness that exact
ability to tune into what's going on for
us and recognize what we're feeling
pulled towards and what we feel like we
can relax our entire selves into that
should be guiding our decision making
because what that body feeling is
indicating is that we're interacting
with something that allows us to bring
our full selves to it and again anything
we bring that full self to we are much
much much more likely to excel at than
the situations that we're trying to
force ourselves into now step number two
is way harder okay now we're going to
talk about what happens after you make
the decision
after you make a given decision there's
something that again i think is a lot
more common to younger enfps because
it's kind of like the older you get the
more decisions you have under your belt
and enough of them start turning out
wrong and then you have to fix them and
it's like your introverted sensing
eventually internalizes you can make the
wrong choice and life will go on and you
probably will make the wrong choice 5
000 more times and life will go on every
time but when you're younger you don't
know that yet it still feels in your
emotional system sometimes like making
the wrong choice and closing the door on
a given possibility will be the end of
the world because yes i still have a
baby it doesn't know yet so step two is
about setting up thought boundaries
once you have made a decision
ruminating over what could have been or
what would have happened if you'd gone
down a different route is absolutely
nothing more than a tactic for keeping
yourself out of the present moment okay
it is really easy to make up an
alternate reality where one different
decision meant that we would have no
problems ever again that we would
struggle with nothing else ever again
and that our lives would be perfect and
pure and problem free if only we had
gone down a different path and there is
absolutely nothing less true than that
there are problems down every single
path in life
different problems but problems and the
reason why you are on the path that
you're on and all of these problems are
cropping up is because those are the
problems that are inherent to that path
but we can be so idealistic with that
early extroverted intuition that we can
fail to anticipate what's going to be
bad about the choices that we make okay
or what's going to feel difficult or
what we are going to have to struggle
with even if the path that we have
chosen is 90 right for us because down
every path there are struggles
so what you are able to see now is the
struggles of the path that you have
chosen because you have chosen it what
you cannot see is the struggles that
would have come up on the other path and
the reason you can't see those struggles
is because you didn't choose that path
it's not because that path is problem
free so to combat that tendency to
ruminate over whether or not you made
the right choice what you have to do
with yourself is decide i will not allow
myself to dwell on this past decision
once i have made it i was watching a
video one time where someone said that
every time they try to think of like
their ex-partner they imagine a giant
stop sign in their brain that just tells
them no stop don't go any further and
that is their cue to redirect their
thoughts to something else when i have a
thought boundary sometimes i like to
picture like a giant wall just forming
in front of me and it's like i try to
walk into it and then i bounce backwards
and have to head back in the other
direction it is this very clear
visualization that what i want to think
about i'm not going to go near i'm going
to literally wall it off in my brain and
turn around in the other direction now
this is not about repressing things that
are important to us it's about refusing
to let ourselves get into rumination
loops that lead us nowhere right so
finding some way to cut yourself off
from ruminating on what could have been
and redirecting your thoughts is going
to be absolutely imperative when it
comes to not regretting your decisions
and a lot of the time i think that what
is most helpful is just recognizing that
when we get caught in these loops of
what could have been and what things
would be like in another universe very
often it's because we're trying to avoid
what's happening in this universe right
what is going on in our actual reality
that we are currently inside of it is
really easy to take ourselves away from
that by spending all of our time
imagining if only i'd done something
different then everything would be like
this it is a lot harder but a lot more
rewarding to look at what actually is to
look at what pain or what grief or what
challenge we're facing in our real life
environment that we did choose and to
choose to stay there and to work with
that in real time that is how we start
forming resilience and
self-accountability and self-trust is
when we decide that no matter what
decision we make even if it's the wrong
one we are not going to self-abandon
midway right we're gonna stay where we
are we're gonna stick with the decision
we've made and we are going to show up
for ourselves fully and completely
inside of that decision there's a
kirkegaard quote that i found when i was
i think also around 17 that i love so
much that goes my honest opinion and
friendly advice is this do it or do not
do it you will regret both and i think
that that is the most key thing to keep
in mind here is that
down every single path you take there
will be joy and there will be reward and
there will be humongous opportunities
for growth
and also down every single path there
will be regret there is not a single
decision you can make in life that will
redeem your life forever right there is
no giant sweeping redemption arc for
your life that is coming real change
happens in a series of tiny choices that
we make over and over and over again in
different areas of our lives over a long
period of time thinkers are a little
more familiar with this that's why they
have like pro and con lists and then for
young nfs it's like every decision looks
like two doors and you know that behind
one of them is an idealistic redemption
fantasy and then the other one is like
the fiery pits of hell and so we have to
choose properly no
no
no that is not how it works behind door
one is some pros and some cons and
behind door two is some pros and some
cons and the third part of this process
is about committing wholly and
completely to whatever path you've
chosen because there are humongous
opportunities for you to find and
cultivate down every single path
but if you are spending so much time
thinking about the path that got away or
the choice you should have made you will
not notice a single one of those real
opportunities as they come up for you
because you will not be paying attention
and that is probably one of the biggest
reasons why enfps can struggle to feel
like they're making the right decisions
a lot of the time is because we spend so
much time zoned out and not present with
our real-time environments that we miss
a lot of the opportunities that are
actually coming up for us so if you
really want to start making better
decisions as an enfp yes there is
allowing yourself room to explore and
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] around and find out and there is
allowing your intuition and your body
awareness to guide you but the most
important decision making tool you will
ever learn is the ability to commit to
whatever decision you have made and that
doesn't mean follow it to the depths of
hell if you're unhappy what it means is
committing to staying present with
whatever it is you have chosen and not
mentally and emotionally jumping ship as
soon as something comes up that you
don't like it means allowing yourself to
stay
in the moments that feel uncomfortable
or difficult or challenging or filled
with grief and choosing to commit to
yourself and make the best of those
situations even if you don't want to be
in them while they're happening i
remember there was one year of my life
where i had made a decision that
i felt was keeping me from that you know
beautiful perfect alternate reality and
so i played a thought experiment with
myself where i said for six months and
six months only i am going to imagine
that there is no other possible world
but this one
that there was no other possible choice
but this one that i have been mandated
to live in this version of reality with
these people who are around me in these
buildings that i exist in day to day and
i'm going to ask myself what would i do
to make the absolute best of this
situation if i knew without a shadow of
a doubt that there was nothing else out
there for me and this was all i was ever
going to get to work with and that year
i [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you not was like the best year of
my life it truly was i took a white
board and hung it on the wall of my
bedroom and it was the first thing i saw
every day for six months and it said
this is it and that was my reminder
every day for six months that i am
tasked with making this life that i have
the best possible life it could be and i
swear to god that is the hack if i have
ever found one to a happy life and to a
life without regrets and to a life where
every decision we make actually feels
like the right one i should do that
again i'm feeling like i'm heading into
a phase in my life where i could bring
that white board back i think i just
made this video as like a reminder to
myself unconsciously
anyways i think that's all that i have
to say on this topic for today let me
know what you guys are thinking in the
comments also reminder that i do run a
six week enfp soul boot camp course and
a six week infp soul boot camp course
where we talk a lot about all of these
things how to bring your most authentic
and inspired and powerful self into
every single decision that you make in
life so if you're interested in that you
can go to my website at
www.heidiprev.com which i will link in
the description of this video
until next time i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and i will see you back here
again soon