hey guys i'm heidi preeb welcome to my
channel if you're new today i am making
a video that is for infps and enfps
because i think that these types really
struggle with this particular thing but
it's really for anyone who has trouble
with this and i think that most
people who have introverted feeling
somewhere in their cognitive stacking
are to some extent going to struggle
with this particular issue this doesn't
mean you have to have introverted
feeling in your stack this can also be
an attachment thing but i wanted to talk
about the issue of letting people go
so what i mean when i say letting people
go is letting people walk out of your
life and go their own way when it is
time for that to happen when it feels
like you have gone as far as you can go
together and you know in some part of
yourself that it's now time to move on
and follow a path in your own life that
doesn't include that person or maybe
that doesn't include that person in the
same capacity that you have included
them in the past and i think that this
can be particularly difficult for those
of us who value introverted feeling
because when you have introverted
feeling you're kind of having two
different relationships with people at
all times you're one having the
relationship with them in real time
where you are genuinely interacting with
them exchanging thoughts and ideas and
feelings and responding to them in the
moment and spending time with them but
there's also the relationship that you
have with that person inside of your
head so all of us regardless of
personality type have constructs of
other people that live inside of our
minds right like if i imagine myself
talking to one of my friends right now
that is not the actual relationship that
i have with my friend right i'm not
actually having that conversation and
the things that i'm gonna picture my
friend telling me in my brain might not
be what they would actually tell me in
real life if i were to go have the same
conversation but a part of me who has
internalized and learned a lot of my
friends behaviors is able to carry on
kind of an imaginary version or a
representation of that friendship inside
of my head even when my friend is not
present again everyone does this but
what introverted feelers in particular
can really struggle with is ending their
relationship with the representation of
that person inside of their minds even
if they feel completely ready to let the
actual human being go so i'm going to
explain a little bit more about what i
mean by this so a couple of weeks ago i
was listening to a sarah silverman
podcast i think that sarah silverman is
probably an entp i relate to so much of
the way that she thinks and processes
but i really noticed that difference in
the decision making axis so someone
called into her and asked her on the
podcast because she answers a lot of fan
questions how do you let people go so
there's someone in my life i think that
for this person it was a romantic
partner who i know we are not good for
each other we are not helping each other
grow or develop but i don't know how to
let the relationship go do you have any
advice and it was interesting because it
sounded like she was really struggling
with even understanding the question
because entps don't have fi right so
those internal representations of people
inside of their minds are not weighted
as heavily when they look at their
relationship with someone as the real
relationship that they're having with
someone in real time because that's what
you use extroverted feeling for right so
her answer it was logical it wasn't that
it was a bad answer but i think that it
probably didn't answer the question in
the way that the man was asking it
because she was saying well it sounds
like you're not getting anything out of
this relationship it sounds like it's
not serving you or the other person so
what's the problem with simply going
your separate ways and allowing it to
maybe be a friendship instead of a
relationship or maybe be someone you
catch up with a couple times a year as
opposed to someone you live with and
share your life with and it was
interesting to me how kind of simply she
seemed to see the situation and that's
not to say like i don't know sarah
silverman i don't know if that would be
something that she would struggle with
or not in real life but it seemed like
she could take this very logical
analysis of it and go oh well you're no
longer getting along in real life so it
doesn't make sense for you to continue
to try to get along and to try to make
this work so why not just do the thing
that does work and what was interesting
about that is that this is very sound
advice for people who use extroverted
feeling and who do focus really heavily
on the real relationships that they have
with people right but those of us with
introverted feeling tend to over rely on
the imaginary representations of people
that we have inside of our minds and
when let's say a relationship ends it's
often that representation that is harder
to let go of than the actual person and
this might sound absolutely bizarre to
anyone who does not value intraverted
feeling or who does not have some other
disposition that leads them to also
value their kind of representations of
people above their actual relationships
with them that can be a trauma thing
right it can be a lot of things but it
all leads to the same end product which
is having difficulty with letting people
go because you are more attached to your
idea of them than you are to the actual
person so when things with the actual
person stop working out it can actually
take you a a really long time to
recognize that and be a really long time
to accept that you might have to let
that person go because you're afraid of
what that means about what's going to
happen to the version of them that you
have in your mind which may actually be
where you're getting the majority of
your comfort from so if this is the
situation you're in so let's say there's
someone in your life that you know you
ought to let go of or that you want to
let go of and you can see that your
relationship is no longer healthy or
functional or whatever it is but you're
really struggling with the letting go
process the first thing i would
recommend you do is sit down and really
sort out and get clear with yourself
about what of your relationship is real
so how often do you actually talk to
them spend time with them share a
routine with them right what is all of
the real stuff that you guys actually
engage on in real life so this is stuff
that would be observable to a third
party who is in the room with both of
you right
versus how much of the relationship with
that person happens inside of your own
mind and you're going to have to be
really mindful when you think about this
how many times a day do you have
thoughts like oh i'm going to call that
person later and that's going to feel
nice i'm going to draw on memories that
i have with that person and that's going
to feel nice i am anticipating what that
person would say about x y or z and
later when i see them i'm gonna see if
that matches up with reality all of
those thoughts that might seem so
fleeting are actually representations of
a person that permeate our lives so when
we let someone go we're not just letting
the actual person go we're also letting
go of all of the comforting thoughts
that we might have over the course of a
day around that person and around our
anticipation of the future with them so
that future can be short-term i'm going
to talk to them later today or it could
be long-term i'm going to spend my life
with them right and a lot of what we're
letting go of when we let go of people
is we are letting go of the future that
we had planned inside of our minds with
them and that can actually be a lot more
painful than letting go of what's really
happening in reality because what's
really happening in reality might be
that you guys are no longer aligned it
might be that you no longer enjoy each
other's company as much as you used to
or you no longer really want to share
your life together but maybe you have
this image of a future with them where
the problems that you have right now are
magically gone and you are happy and
harmonious and everything is functioning
perfectly like it was in the beginning
and maybe that's actually going to be
the hardest thing for you to give up on
is that future that you had imagined
okay and there is very real grief
associated with giving up a plan for the
future that you had small or a large
scale but it's important to note that
that's not the same thing as letting the
actual person go okay so there's two
things you're going to be mourning and
you have to first separate them out what
is the real actual interactions that i
have with this person that i'm going to
miss and what is my internal
representation of this person which i'm
going to miss because if someone's out
of your life for good it's really hard
to keep that fantasy alive of things
magically getting better and you staying
together in the future and having a
happy life together right there are
certain fantasies we have that require a
little bit of reality in there in order
for them to feel real enough for us to
be comforted by them but make no mistake
fantasies about the future can be
extremely comforting they can be this
bomb that we just rub all over our
psyche anytime something gets rough and
unfortunately that is not the healthiest
way to deal with things getting rough
right i have another video on this where
i talk about healthy versus unhealthy
fantasies so figuring out whether you
are making a plan that you're going to
work towards which is kind of a healthy
fantasy or whether you are dissociating
from the reality of what's happening and
going off into a fantasy land that you
don't really have any reality built
beneath so it would actually be pretty
hard for you to arrive there in real
life but being aware of those
dissociative fantasies and how often and
in what capacity you're having them can
be a really important step in your
healing process because fantasies like
food like alcohol like substances like
television can be used to numb ourselves
out from what's actually going on and if
we have a relationship in real life that
in real time and space is just not
working out between two people it is not
kind or loving for either of you to hold
that relationship hostage so that you
can keep soothing yourself with this
fantasy right it's okay to just
acknowledge that you have a very big
fantasy and that it gives you comfort
and that if you are to let this person
go you now have an awareness of where
you're going to need comfort how
frequently and to what extent and now
you can start looking at alternative
options to giving yourself not what that
person gave you but what that fantasy
about that person gave you okay and both
of those areas are probably going to be
places where you're going to have to
find compensatory strategies so let's
say you are used to calling someone at
the end of every day and debriefing your
day you might truly in real time really
miss that if you let that person go
right so that's a real thing that you're
gonna miss but you might also really
miss when you walk to work every day and
listen to music and start thinking about
this alternate future that you have with
this person you might also miss the
comfort that you're going to get out of
that or maybe for now you want to let go
of that fantasy but as soon as things
get rough two or three or four months
from now if you aren't aware that that's
a fantasy and you start dissociating
back into it you might think oh this
means i want that person back right but
maybe you haven't talked to that person
in three or four months maybe you have
no idea what's going on with them or if
things would be better with you this
time around you aren't recognizing the
fantasy
for what it is which is a bomb that
you're putting over your reality in
order to not feel some other type of
pain and so figuring out what the
function of this fantasy life that
involves this real person is is going to
help you understand where you need to
let go of someone in reality which is
actually often the easier thing to do
because in reality by the time you want
to let someone go it's usually because
things aren't working so well right so
the philosophy that kind of underlies
all of this is just taking that radical
responsibility for whatever it is that
you're really struggling with in your
life and ceasing to project it onto
someone else because if you believe that
one person is solving all of your
problems and keeping you comforted and
stable and secure when really it's a
combination of that person's true
influence on your life and your fantasy
about that person and the representation
of them that you hold in your mind to
kind of keep you safe and warm
internally when they're not available
you're not dealing with things
accurately and you're actually
projecting more onto that person than
what is true or fair and that's going to
make navigating the end of a
relationship with them very difficult
not only between you but internally so
what you need to do is figure out what
type of comfort you're getting from that
fantasy about them what type of comfort
that idea of them that keeps you company
when they are not physically present is
giving you that you could give yourself
because the good news is that that
representation of them is not real them
it exists entirely inside of your own
mind so if you have someone who loves
you and thinks well of you and respects
you even when they are not standing in
front of you telling you how they feel
about you you're probably able to recall
a felt sense of what it's like in your
body and in your emotions when they do
express positive feelings for you and
that felt sense that permission that you
are giving yourself in those moments to
feel valued loved like you are worthy of
praise and admiration and connection
that's actually an emotion that you are
giving yourself in that moment right
you're just giving yourself permission
to feel it
via the memory of that person you don't
want to own your own positive feelings
of yourself in certain moments so you
recall the memory or the idea that you
have of this person to give you those
positive feelings but you don't need to
do that those feelings are in you the
whole time and of course it is always
going to be hard to let go of the real
person but often by the time we get to a
point where we think that we have to or
want to let go of that real person it's
because the actual relationship has
become dysfunctional or no longer aligns
with what we need and want in life and
so that might actually be the easier
part of the equation the harder part is
going to be reclaiming the things that
we think that we can only get through
association with that person which
ironically we already have inside of
ourselves because merely recollecting
that person
allows us to give ourselves permission
to feel those things that's why in some
cases you can withstand a lot of
dysfunction because you are still being
kind of kept warm by this fantasy of how
you want this person to think of you
that is very different and so the
process becomes about perpetually
allowing yourself to feel the way that
you believe only they could make you
feel because if you have ever felt any
of those things in the absence of them
it means that it's not coming from them
it's coming from you and you finally
giving yourself permission to feel the
things that you suspect might be true
about yourself that are pretty positive
and often that is the real work of
letting someone go taking back all of
the things that we've projected onto
them and owning them as things that are
inside of us for better and for worse
right it means we can't blame them for
the things that go wrong in our life
anymore it also means we can't blame
them for the things that go right and
depending on where you're coming from
one side of that coin might feel scarier
to you than the other one but if there
is any advice i can give to all of us
out there who use introverted feeling or
who just have these very vivid
representations of people inside of our
minds that we are holding quasi-real
relationships with inside of our own
minds it's just recognizing just being
willing to name that for what it is
which is the fantasy element of a
relationship allows you to start working
with it in reality as soon as we name a
fantasy of fantasy now we've brought it
into the realm of the real right because
we're dealing with what it actually is
and the realm of the real is always
where we're going to be able to grow and
learn from and that place of growth and
integration and learning is going to be
a lot easier to heal from than the
opposite i forget where i heard this
from and i cannot find it online again
but i remember seeing this quote one
time that was like real problems always
have solutions unreal problems never do
so when we are struggling so much with
something like how to let someone go
consider whether or not you have yet
brought the entire problem into the
realm of the real because that's the
only place you can actually make change
from and i think that a lot of the time
the things that we are trying so hard to
figure out how to let go of in the real
world are already gone
right the relationship we wanted to have
with someone that was healthy and
fulfilling and growing by the time
you're ready to let that person go is
probably already long gone in the real
world so all it is is a process of
accepting being willing to work with
reality and finding a true solution to
the true problem of needing something to
replace that comfort that you got out of
fantasizing right
maybe friendship can replace that maybe
adventure can replace that maybe having
something different to look forward to
inside of your own mind can serve as a
pretty solid replacement for that other
future that you had planned it's not
just our real lives that need
reorganizing when things go wrong it's
also the lives that we live inside of
our minds especially if you are an nf
type who lives a lot of your life inside
your own mind all right i think that's
all i have to say on this topic for
today if you are an enfp or an infp
personality type i want to remind you
that i do run six week enfp and infp
soul boot camp courses on my website
www.heidipreeb.com
i will put the link in the description
of this video and in those boot camps we
actually talk quite a bit about
recognizing the fantasy from the real
and understanding when you are missing
out on the real life that you have in
front of you in real time because you
are preferring and latching on to that
fantasy life that's in your head so if
that's something that you resonate with
and that you struggle with i really
recommend you check that program out in
the meantime let me know your thoughts
in the comments of this video i'm always
really curious about what you guys are
thinking and feeling and experiencing
and until next time i love you i hope
you're taking care of yourselves and i
will see you back here again really soon
[Music]
you