hey guys heidi prepare welcome to my
channel if you're new welcome back if
you are not on this channel we talk
about all things personality type
attachment styles and any other systems
that give us a window into understanding
ourselves and other people so today i
wanted to talk about something that i
felt like i sort of left unaddressed in
a video that i made a couple months back
about the best and worst jobs for enfps
so best and worst career options is
something that is widely attributed to
type and i think that absolutely there
are better and worse career
choices for anyone of any type but i
think that the more important thing to
look at when we're looking at how do we
spend our careers how do we spend our
lives what do we choose to engage with
is not necessarily the what we choose to
do but the how we choose to do it so
what career you pick is not as important
as what you as an individual bring to
that career and how you are showing up
to it day to day so there was one thing
i felt like i neglected to say when we
talked about best and worst careers for
enfps and that is that no matter what
career you're doing no matter where you
find yourself in life no matter which
situations you happen into the most
important asset that you have as a human
being that you need to be protecting
nurturing and taking care to grow and
expand upon throughout your life is your
energy
now
this is true for every single type so i
feel a little bit scammy titling this
video just for enfps but i do think that
the way we manage our energy as enfps is
fairly different than the way that most
other types manage their energy the main
exception to this being entps who share
our dominant cognitive function and will
kind of have a similar process for what
energizes and depletes them but today i
wanted to talk about both some myths
that i think we have around enfps and
why most of us don't intellectually
choose to prioritize our energy as well
as how we can start doing that and what
it will mean if we do so the first
obvious question is what do i mean by
energy by your energy i mean the feeling
in your body that you are firing on all
cylinders you are wide awake very
present with whatever you're
experiencing or thinking about or
turning over in your mind and you are
able to fully attend to what you want to
be attending to so that's what i'm
talking about when i say energized as
opposed to feeling like you are kind of
calling it in in your life so a lack of
energy would manifest as you kind of
going through the motions zoning out not
really being where you are not really
bringing a lot of yourself to the task
but just kind of reacting to what the
world wants from you and i think that a
lot of enfps live in that space for a
lot of their lives particularly if they
grow up in environments where their
natural energy orientation where the
places that you get energy from are not
valued by the people around you and you
can kind of assume this is just what
life is i have things i'm excited about
that i don't value and then the things
that i think are important in life are
the things that make me feel kind of
dead inside so i just force myself to go
through those motions and i think that
that in particular can be a trap that
leads a lot of enfps to fall into
careers and life situations that are not
right for them because we don't know
that there can be another way and that
we are allowed to prioritize another way
so before we get into how to hone in on
and expand upon that natural sense of
energy i want us to bust the myth that
doing what energizes other people so
again when we look at the personality
composition of the world we have a lot
of sensing judging types and we have a
lot of sensing perceiving types and we
do not have nearly as many intuitive
perceiving types which is what you are
as an enfp and so a lot of us grow up
taking the lead from sensing judging
types who have this kind of one best way
approach to getting things done because
that's what works for them they are very
procedurally oriented they work really
well when they're following a very
specific plan to get to a very specific
end point and that is how they gain
their energy but that is precisely our
process as intuitive perceiving types
for losing energy is limiting our
options putting our blinders on and not
being creative in any fashion so a lot
of us think okay in order to be
productive successful have a good life i
need to orient myself the way that sj's
orient themselves but what ends up
happening is we end up creating so much
mental resistance between the way that
we naturally are oriented and want to go
out and experience and explore the world
and what we are forcing ourselves to do
which is narrow our focus and do things
in a linear way that that mental
resistance that ends up coming up for us
ends up costing us time and money so i
spent years of my life trying to play
the sj game as most nps do at some point
in their life and i hit a wall at one
point where i was so exhausted by what i
was doing that i would spend hours upon
hours upon hours procrastinating it felt
sometimes like my full-time job was
procrastination and i felt so stupid
because i had the option to be making a
lot of money i had clients who were
willing to pay me a lot of money for a
service that i was not particularly
passionate about but that i did well
and i was not making nearly the amount i
could be making because i was
experiencing so much mental resistance
that i could not get most of my work
done and i was also spending all of my
time outside of work just feeling
chronically stressed about the work that
i was not living up to now the problem
is that during that time i was not
growing very much as a human being
because this preoccupation with the
stress of what i thought i should be
doing better at was eating away at my
brain and my mental health and so even
though i was in theory making a lot of
money and doing a good job by more
traditional standards i was absolutely
murdering my soul in the process and
creating more and more and more
depression and anxiety and resistance
inside of my own mind and that
resistance at the time was costing me in
concrete dollars and cents i could have
pushed myself through endlessly and
ended up in a career where i would
honestly probably be making more money
than i was right now
but that career would be murdering my
mental health and my soul in the process
and the number one thing i want to
promise you is that nothing is worth
that at the end of your life okay
no amount of money when you are going
down that path where you are trading
your energy and your life force for
something tangible like money or other
resources
this will only work for so long you will
hit a burnout point and when that
burnout point hits you will be forced to
prioritize your energy again okay
but if you wait until it gets to that
point as i did it can take absolute
years to turn that back around and the
only way to turn it around is to force
yourself to put getting your energy and
vitality and sense of self back at the
center of your life
because
when you are an enfp or an endp or any
other type that values any highly in
their cognitive stacking what your brain
naturally wants to do is learn as much
as it can possibly learn through having
different experiences through exploring
different philosophies through
understanding the world using a million
different lenses and this is the
absolute food that you need to be giving
your soul in order to thrive and if
there is a single thing i would hope for
enfps if there is a single piece of
advice i would give or single piece of
wisdom i wish that i could offer to my
younger self it's that you have to put
your energy at the center of your life
you have to be willing to sacrifice
money
opportunities that you don't really want
relationships that do not feel right
career opportunities that do not feel
right anything that gives you this nine
kind of sense of oh that's not quite me
in my body you have to be willing to put
aside in order to prioritize feeding
your mind and your body and your soul as
an enfp feeding your mind body and soul
looks very different than what the
traditional profile of wellness might
look like right so for you this does not
mean having these extremely stringent
wellness routines where you do the same
thing day after day after day which is
what it might look like for let's say an
sj type for you wellness does mean
having new adventures having new
experiences making lots of diverse new
friends putting yourself out there going
for the things that you want and
allowing yourself to make seemingly
impractical choices insofar as you're
able to do so your energy is oriented
towards that exploration of life okay
that is what makes you feel alive it's
what makes you feel invigorated it's
what makes you feel curious and invested
in the world and if there is anything i
can promise you it's that if you
prioritize your energy above all else in
the long run that will pay off for you
infinitely more than if you are to
follow a traditional path that drains
you okay because you are able to do a
lot more with your intellect a lot more
quickly than the average person i know
i'm like not supposed to say stuff like
that in type videos but you do have this
incredibly active incredibly sharp
intellect extroverted intuition is able
to absorb an almost terrifying amount of
information and make sense of it and
connect it to tangible external reality
in a way that other people understand
and that is a superpower that probably
nobody has taught you how to nurture
because extroverted intuition is not
that common it's especially not that
common as a dominant cognitive function
so
if you are not feeding yourself new
ideas new experiences and new thoughts
and new challenges on a more or less
constant basis it's like you are
willingly operating on a reserve power
supply okay when you could be at full
power if you made staying engaged
energized and interested in your life as
the number one priority and i truly mean
number one because here's how it's going
to pay off your superpower is your
ability to take in a wide array of very
complex information and make sense of it
simply not many people have this skill i
promise you not many people are able to
grasp complex theories as quickly and as
easily as you are and even fewer people
are able to communicate those ideas well
and even fewer people are able to
entertain and engage people in the
process okay
but if you are trying to produce before
you have given yourself the opportunity
to fully experience and integrate your
experiences is kind of like pulling
pasta out of a pot when it is still half
raw okay you might have the best pasta
noodles on earth but if you are not
allowing them to cook fully you are not
going to be serving a meal that is
useful or valuable for anyone so i hit a
point after i had reached this kind of
burnout point in my career where i
realized i need to go have a lot of new
experiences and i need time to integrate
everything that i have been learning
over the past several years and i did
this at a time that was completely
impractical because life had forced me
into that situation i hit a wall so hard
that there was no recovering from it i
could not possibly continue to function
well in my life with the amount of
mental resistance i was facing there was
absolutely no way forward that was
feasible so last fall after literal
years of being able to do almost no
client work because i was so exhausted
from the field that i was in i took six
weeks off at a time when it was
completely impractical i went into debt
to do this it was not by any means the
practical thing to do and i completely
disconnected and went solo hiking for
six weeks and when i came back having
spent time analyzing integrating and
becoming deeply familiar with everything
that i had been mulling over and
considering and thinking about over the
past several years i launched into one
of the most productive streaks of my
life
for literal years before this fall i
would have a single client project and i
would spend three weeks not doing it and
one day doing it okay
when i came back i began producing every
single day i started a youtube channel i
started putting out videos every day i
started writing and creating content for
future courses again and none of that
would have been possible if i had not
taken a giant break and put regaining my
energy and my connection to myself at
the absolute center of my life even at a
time when it was impractical to do so as
in enfp
when you are firing on all cylinders you
are able to produce and create at a
level that is far above the average
person
when you are firing at all cylinders you
are producing insights and thoughts and
perspectives that are far above what the
average person can produce this is not
to say you are better than other types
every single type has something that
they do at an above average caliber and
when you are leaning fully and
completely into your explorative and
introspective nature you are able to
produce thought work at an extremely
high level but in order to do that you
have to be willing to feed your mind and
soul first there is absolutely no way to
circumnavigate this and i know because i
have tried everything under the sun
i promise you when i say that to try to
circumnavigate this and to try to live
in a way that is counter to how my
natural energy is oriented it does not
work the only thing it gives you is
results that you don't want because even
if you are able to make a ton of
money through it which i was you will
have to be spending that money to
maintain a lifestyle that you don't like
and you will have to surround yourself
with people who you don't feel inspired
by and you will have to continuously
conform to these expectations that you
do not feel aligned with and i promise
you nothing is worth that no amount of
money is worth that no amount of life is
worth that okay you owe it to your
future self and to anyone in the world
who you want to be able to show up and
actually give to to prioritize your
energy as the person you actually are
not doing this is like having a
superpower that you never activate and i
personally want to see you activate it
because i know what happens when our
type feels fully alive and fully engaged
with their life and it is extraordinary
and very needed in a world full of
people who are pretty used to
sleepwalking right we need that critical
analysis we need that deep and intuitive
connection to the self we need that
wisdom that comes from having a lot of
experiences and thinking critically
about all of them all of that stuff is
stuff that the world is in desperate
need of right now and if you're able to
show up for yourself in that way that
ends up being what you're able to offer
the world at a time when the world needs
it pretty badly so if you can't
prioritize you for yourself consider
prioritizing yourself for the good of
the planet alright that is my
rant for today but i have been thinking
about it for several weeks now and i
wanted to get that off my chest and i
feel better that i did so as always let
me know your thoughts in the comments i
also do run a six-week enfp soul
bootcamp course where we talk
specifically about this for most of it
how to put your energy and your true
self back at the center of your life and
letting everything else flow outward
from that so if you are interested in
that i will leave a link in the
description of this video and as always
i love you guys i hope you're taking
care of yourselves and each other
and i will see you back here again super
soon
[Music]