hey guys heidi preeb here today i am
doing a video that is probably the most
requested video ever
like people will comment their requests
for this video on videos that have
absolutely nothing to do with
myers-briggs at all like i will post an
attachment video that's all about like
childhood trauma and someone will just
comment enfps and healthy habits please
so i decided today i would finally sit
down and do this video which is how to
maintain healthy habits as an enfp now i
found it curious that so many people
were requesting this because i feel like
there's already a decent amount of kind
of clickbaity articles out there on this
topic however it did occur to me that
the reason it's still being requested is
because all of the advice out there is
largely
so
when you are an enfp a lot of the time
you get advice about productivity about
habits from people who have things like
t-e-n-s-i very high up in their stacking
so they're going to be recommending
advice that doesn't actually work for
you and for how the way that your energy
functions so this video is going to be
purely no bs so i'm not going to give
you any pieces of advice that you're
going to use for like three days and
then completely throw out the window as
soon as something more exciting comes
along i'm only going to talk to you
about how to actually maintain healthy
habits based on what i've found works
for me so a lot of this is actually
going to be how not to maintain healthy
habits so which advice not to take and
which traps to avoid falling into so the
first thing that i'm going to say about
maintaining any sort of healthy routine
whether this has to do with your
physical health habits your emotional
health habits your work your social life
absolutely anything if you do not like
the habit that you are setting up for
yourself you absolutely will not
maintain it long term okay and this
should be
so obvious but it's not it is so not
because what we tend to do as enfps is
we will indulge ourselves on the things
that feel very exciting to us for a long
period of time burn ourselves out and
then try to tell ourselves now it's time
to force myself into a routine that i
don't really like and try to get myself
back on track by basically torturing
myself by putting myself through this
habit or this routine that i don't like
that i'm white knuckling through and
that i'm telling myself if i can just do
this and force myself to do this every
day things will get better that will
work for best case scenario a couple of
months okay but that is not a long-term
long-lasting habit that is a short-term
intervention that will change things
around for a little bit but if you want
your habits to last you have to like
them
not the outcome of them but the habits
themselves so for example for most of my
life before my like mid late 20s i was
the worst yo-yo dieter ever like i was
always up or down 20 pounds and i was
never able to find a way to kind of stay
at a weight that i was happy with for
more than like a couple of months at a
time and the reason for this was because
i did not like eating healthy foods so i
could deny myself foods for a period of
time i could force myself to exercise
quite a bit for a period of time but
because i didn't enjoy the habit of
eating in a healthy way i could not
sustain a healthy body weight there is
also some like trauma healing i needed
to do but a big thing that changed
before that is that i started dating
someone who was an exceptional cook and
i mean good cook like graduated from
culinary school knew how to make a
carrot taste like the best thing you'd
ever eaten kind of good cook and when i
started dating this person i learned for
the first time in my life healthy food
can taste incredible and over the course
of a couple of years i taught myself to
cook those same really healthy dishes
for myself in such a way that i would
want to eat them over unhealthy food and
obviously this doesn't work like 100 of
the time yes i still have pizza and ice
cream sometimes but if you think that
the only foods you like are things that
are bad for you then you're always going
to be in the process of either indulging
or restricting yourself unless you can
find a way to feel satisfied with the
habit that you're forming even if it
never got you anywhere you will not keep
it in your life long term okay so this
applies to anything if you want to wake
up early but you hate waking up early
you have to find a way to like waking up
early or else you are not going to do it
consistently if you want to exercise and
have a really strong fit body but you
don't like exercising you have to find a
type of exercise that you enjoy or else
you will not be able to stick with it
long term when i was about 21 i
discovered weight training i went to a
class where we were picking up weights
and i remember the feeling of like doing
bicep curls for the first time and
thinking oh my god i just love the way
that this makes me feel like i want to
be a person who does this consistently
and who feels this natural sense of like
strength and groundedness which was what
i felt when i went into the weight room
and picked up weights it is nine years
later and i still weight train
consistently three times a week and i
more or less consistently have since
that first time i picked up that weight
and it felt like me so as an enfp your
identity is tied into anything that you
choose to do so if you want to make a
habit last long term you have to make it
become a part of your identity and for
something to become a part of your
identity it has to be something that you
enjoy so james clear who wrote atomic
habits talks a lot about this he talks
about how when we identify with
something when an activity or a habit or
routine that we've decided on becomes a
part of the way that we think about
ourselves we will then be naturally
motivated to continue to do that thing
even if the normal things that got us
started no longer apply when you start
to associate the habits that you do with
the person that you are you will
naturally fight to maintain those habits
because they will feel like coming home
not like forcing yourself out in the
cold okay you have to like it or it's
not gonna last tip number two completely
eradicates everything i just said but i
am going to throw this in there because
sometimes you have to maintain a habit
that you don't want to maintain so for
example at this point in my life i am
taking grad school in the uk remotely
from canada so what that means is that
three days a week my classes start at 5
00 a.m eastern standard time which means
i have to be awake at 4 30 at the latest
to get up and get a coffee in my brain
before i interact with a human virtually
and do i like waking up at 4 30 am not
at all not even a little bit i am a very
social person i like to stay up late
talking to people i can appreciate a
good morning but a good morning to me
starts at like 7 00 am 6 00 am max 4 30
way way earlier than i would ever want
or choose to wake up on a regular basis
however i have to do it don't really
have a choice and sometimes in life we
find ourselves in those situations right
so how do we build habits around things
that we don't necessarily enjoy i like
to just trick my brain into thinking
it's doing something it enjoys by
messing with my triggers when i use the
word trigger here i am not talking about
trauma triggers that is a completely
different thing what i'm talking about
is tiny sensory details in your
environment that make a little alarm
bell go off in your brain telling you
something is about to happen and our
lives are full of these they are
everywhere so i am trained in
neuro-linguistic programming and nlp
deals a lot with helping us figure out
what are the tiny sensory details that
are triggering us in ways that we don't
necessarily become consciously aware of
but that tell our bodies it's time to do
x y or z and this concept is a little
bit tricky to grasp we do go over it in
a lot more detail in the enfp soul
bootcamp courses we talk about using si
to recognize what your sensory triggers
are and then optimizing your physical
home environment to bypass the triggers
that you don't want to go off and to
highlight the triggers that you do want
to go off hey asi what are you doing
oh i'm taking an inventory of all of our
triggers how often do you go through and
take inventory of everything that's
triggering us oh constantly i never stop
okay i have some questions about the
list um i don't think that all of these
things are triggers for us
they absolutely all are well it says
here brown mug but
i'm holding it right now and i feel fine
i don't feel triggered
ah correct that's because the mug
triggers alertness
okay i don't think the mug is triggering
my alertness i think the coffee that i
put in the mug is doing that partially
correct the coffee also makes you feel
alert of course but every morning when
you pull that mug out of the cupboard
knowing that the coffee is about to go
into it your wakefulness level increases
by approximately seven percent
automatically so through doing the
exercise that we described in that
course i learned that for me looking at
my phone is a really big trigger for me
in terms of how my body is going to feel
so when i look at my phone and it says 7
am automatically my body kind of gets
pumped with energy because it goes okay
time to wake up time to tackle the day
when i look at my phone and it says 3 pm
my brain automatically checks in and
goes okay workday's almost over have we
done what we need to get done are we
ready to start moving into the next
phase of the day when i look at my phone
and it says 10 pm my brain automatically
starts going time to start winding down
let's maybe put on a tv show or get in
the bath so if i want to manipulate
myself to have a different response to a
certain stimuli than what i'm used to it
might actually help to change the
stimuli so that i don't have to
reprogram my brain i can keep my brain
programmed the way it's programmed and i
can just mess with it on the days that i
have to wake up at 4 30 am the next day
i know my brain is not gonna want to
start winding down until 10 pm so at 3
p.m on the day before i have to wake up
early i set my phone three hours ahead
so that every time i look at the time my
brain thinks that it's later than it is
so when it's 7 pm i look at my phone and
it says 10 pm and automatically my body
starts doing what it's used to doing and
down regulating itself because it's 10
o'clock it saw the queue on the cell
phone it doesn't matter if real me knows
it's not 10 o'clock my brain saw that
cue on that cell phone my body took the
response from it and now my body is
starting to wind down even though it's 7
pm
you can do this with a million different
things some people have visual triggers
so looking at the time or walking into a
room and maybe noticing how light versus
dark it is some people have auditory
cues so maybe waking up and hearing your
partner showering is your cue that it's
time to get out of bed and start the day
there are a lot of different cues you
can be taking from your environment but
if you can learn to figure out what
those little trigger points are and then
manipulate your environment so that the
triggers are actually going off at the
time when you want them to go off not at
the time when they usually go off you
can mess with your brain in a way that
will allow you to get into a habit that
feels natural but is not this one is a
bit of a tricky concept again we expand
on it in the enfp bootcamp but it's
really just about making conscious
whatever is already in your si and then
manipulating it to your advantage tip
number three once again we're just gonna
cut all the bs from this video lean into
your own laziness so set up a system
where it would actually be harder for
you to not do the thing that you want to
make yourself do so for example this
summer i felt like i wasn't getting
enough exercise on a daily basis and i
also really wanted a co-working space to
go work from during the day and so i
purposely joined a co-working space that
was an hour and 20 minute walk away from
my house that i could not get to using
public transit and i knew that the cost
of an uber to take me to that co-working
space would be too much for me to
stomach because i don't like spending
money on transportation and i also knew
that i would go crazy if i were to work
for my apartment all of the time but
coffee shops in toronto still weren't
open last summer because of covid so i
set myself up for this kind of perfect
scenario where the solution to my
problem required me to get exercise and
then luckily i talked about this in a
different video but i also learned i
could listen to audiobooks on the way
there so now i have kind of the dual
incentive of my routine is both
enjoyable and it is actually harder for
me not to do it it was more annoying for
me to stay home and not have a
co-working space to work out of than it
was for me to just get up midday and
walk to my co-working space so it became
a part of my routine in such a way that
it was actually the easiest possible
solution to my problem i remember
listening to a podcast one time where
someone was talking about opt-out
friendships so they were saying that in
this digital age where we are so
disconnected so many people have a lot
of trouble maintaining friendships and
this podcast was basically saying the
best way to maintain a solid social
circle is to have standing events that
you would have to opt out of rather than
opt into so instead of having to plan to
meet up with your friend every week
let's say you just have a standing
coffee date where every saturday at 10
a.m you guys meet up at the same coffee
shop and if you plan not to do that this
week you have to message them and opt
out and i thought this was a brilliant
way of leaning into your own laziness
most of us don't like having to make
excuses or tell someone we can't show up
to something so if you can set up your
life in such a way that you are
accountable to the choices that you make
like having true standing commitments to
the things that you want in your life
that you have to make a specific reason
for not attending you're going to be way
more likely to keep those habits in
check so make your habits as easy as
humanly possible and if you can i would
say make it hard to avoid them make it
so that it's an uncomfortable or
difficult situation not to do your
habits this is once again something that
james clear recommends in the book
atomic habits which is a great book
there are certain books that get
recommended to me so many times that i
almost have like spite about it like for
a while i was like i'm not reading
atomic habits i'm not reading the power
of now
phenomenal books just great great reads
um and atomic habits just is one that i
feel like fits really nicely in the
brains of enfps for various reasons that
i will go into when i do my end of year
book review okay tip number four is
figure out how to get dopamine hits out
of the activities that you're trying to
turn into habits
so you are an extrovert you are not
naturally great at delaying
gratification that's not your strong
suit you can do it you can white knuckle
your way through things but i would
never advise you to white-knuckle your
way through a habit that you're trying
to form so what you need to do is figure
out how to get a dopamine hit from the
completion of that habit every single
time if you're just waiting for the
long-term payoffs that's not gonna work
for you because you're gonna find a way
to make excuses for yourself in the
process the process itself has to give
you a dopamine hit every time so for
example right now i'm creating a new
course i have made courses before and i
have made them in different ways and
here's what i've learned if i try to
write all of the content ahead of time
sit down and film it all in the period
of two or three days and then edit it
all at once i will get so overwhelmed
and bogged down in the process of doing
only one thing at a time that i will
completely lose motivation and that
course will not get made however if i do
it the wildly impractical way of sitting
down in the morning writing a video
setting up all my lights filming it
right away while i'm excited about it
editing it right away while i'm excited
about it and then uploading it onto the
course portal as soon as i'm done
editing it i will film fantastic and
passionate videos because thinking of an
idea fleshing it out editing it and
uploading it all in one day feels so
incredible to me like that sense of
completion and that sense of doing
something that i'm excited about well
i'm excited about it then getting the
hit of feeling like i finished it is
just a high that i need to harness if i
want to do good work
it does not make practical or logical
sense in theory to do it this way okay
it takes me like half an hour to set up
my lights every time it would be much
better if i could write everything ahead
of time set up my lights one maybe two
or three times and get everything filmed
at once as opposed to filming 20 videos
in 20 different days but it's the way
that it will get finished for me because
it's the process that i enjoy
so you will get a lot of advice as an
enfp about how to optimize or how to
make the best possible logical routine
but that's not necessarily going to be
the routine that works the best for you
the most consistently if it's not the
routine that you like right
you have to be willing as an enfp to
behave in a way that others might see as
impractical because you need to
prioritize your own joy or else the
routine will not last at all so
unfortunately you are not a tea dom i
say unfortunately i i personally like
being in any dom but you know we're all
different
which means you probably won't like the
routine that makes the most sense
because you don't get a dopamine hit out
of doing what makes the most sense right
estjs and entjs the mere act of doing
what makes sense gets them energized and
excited so of course they're going to do
the thing that makes the most sense
every time but you get energized through
different means so you have to figure
out what it is that gives you that hit
of dopamine and be willing to do it even
if it's not the most practical or most
direct route to your goal because it's
going to be a lot better than doing the
most practical thing for a week and then
giving up completely right work with
your natural energy okay always tip
number five is one that it took me so
long to figure out in my own life which
is instead of beating yourself up when
you don't like your habits or when you
are abandoning a habit get curious about
why that habit isn't working for you
okay it's probably not because you are
weak willed or impractical or just hate
being healthy and happy and joyous
probably the reason that habit doesn't
work for you is because there's
something that you want more than that
habit there's something that is drawing
your attention that requires you to give
it up so for example when i was in my
early and mid-20s i would go through
long stretches where i was living in
canada in my own apartment and i could
stay healthy and active and engaged in
my work but then i would have this urge
to go travel and as soon as i went
traveling all of my healthy habits would
go out the window and so i had this kind
of polarized life where i was either out
on the road eating and drinking whatever
i wanted all of the time or i was at
home getting eight hours of sleep and
exercising every day and making healthy
meals and there was no in between and it
wasn't until i learned to integrate
health habits into my travel that worked
for me without robbing me of any of my
joy or spontaneity that i was able to
start maintaining those habits on the
road so for example i learned that when
i travel i need to intermittent fast
because i want to stay relatively
healthy and balanced and i know that if
i'm in india and i go into an indian
restaurant i am not going to be able to
control myself from trying out a couple
of different dishes so i set up a
routine for myself where i fast until 2
pm or whatever it is that day and then i
can eat a little bit more food later in
the day and when i'm at home i don't
necessarily need to do that because my
schedule is a lot more under my own
control but i know that when i'm
traveling and i'm out and i'm meeting
new people i'm going to have to have
different habits that allow me a lot
more flexibility the same is true of my
work habits i had to learn what i was
capable of doing work-wise while on the
road versus what i was capable of doing
work-wise at home so if all of your
habits are so strict and so specific
that you require a very specific
external environment in order to
complete them they probably are going to
go out the window as soon as you want
something different than that
environment and you have to be aware of
that the only habits that will ever
stick long term for you as an enfp are
habits that you enjoy and that can
fluctuate with you and the changing
circumstances of your life okay if you
have to work from 7 to 12 p.m every day
or else you'll get nothing done that's
not going to work anymore if you change
time zones if you have a child if you
suddenly have a new demand or a new want
for your life that means you have to
work different hours you need to have
habits that are comfortable but also
flexible and that's how you're going to
make them stick long term and again if
you like your habits if you really
really enjoy engaging with them you're
going to want to find a way to make them
flexible right it's not going to feel
like a relief to let them go it's going
to feel like you want to find a way to
embed them into your life so before you
leave please go into the comments and
drop a habit that you have found that
you really enjoy because i think that a
group of enfps is probably a group of
people with the weirdest habits on earth
and i would love to see what some of
those are for you guys also of course
drop any questions in the comments a
reminder that i do run enfp and infp
soul boot camp courses which teach you
things like how to set healthy habits
that you love how to be more productive
how to figure out how to use your
natural energy to get you closer to the
goals that you want without murdering
your soul in the process so you can
check those out at my website
www.heidiprev.com which is linked below
and until next time i love you guys i
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and i will see you back again here soon
[Music]