guys heidi preeb here welcome back to my
channel if you are not new here welcome
to my channel if you are on this channel
we talk a lot about myers-briggs
attachment theory and any other theories
or models that help us understand
ourselves and other people so today i
wanted to
knock on a rant per se but have i guess
a baby rant about something that i hear
enfps and infps saying all of the time
that i think is kind of bs and what that
thing is is the idea that their entire
lives would be solved or would be
completely different if only they had
more discipline now
i understand there are cases where
discipline is absolutely the answer to
our problems i did not feel like filming
videos this morning i felt like lying in
my bed and reading a book for seven
hours and if i had not had the
discipline to get up and do this you
would not be watching this video i would
not have consistency on my youtube
channel and over a long period of time
that would cause me to lose out on
something that really brings me a lot of
intrinsic joy in life so yes absolutely
there are many situations where
discipline is what we need to help us to
move towards a specific goal that we
want and discipline is what gets us
through the days that feel difficult so
when we know there's somewhere we want
to get to and we know exactly what we
have to do to get there discipline comes
into play on the days where motivation
does not win out where we don't feel
naturally energized or inclined to do
something but we know we kind of have to
do it if we want to get to where we're
going so i'm not knocking discipline i'm
not saying it's something that we should
not have but i think that there is this
kind of idealized version of discipline
that lives inside the minds of infps and
enfps that makes them believe if only i
had it all of my other problems would be
solved because you might for example see
one of your friends who is a tj
exercising a lot of discipline in their
lives and getting really big results
either career-wise financially
health-wise whatever it is and so you
might think to yourself if only i had
their level of discipline i could have
the same things that they have a you
probably could but what i want you to
consider first is do you want the things
that they have and do you want to go
through the process that they go through
on a daily repetitive basis in order to
get those things would it truly be worth
it for you because do you have the same
love of the process that they might have
or is it possible that discipline isn't
the only problem is it possible that the
problem is actually a lack of direction
and a lack of knowing decisively where
you want to get to because here's a
thing that i believe very wholeheartedly
i believe that nobody has a natural lack
of motivation i really don't i think
that we just measure motivation in a
very specific and very narrow way so we
see the people who like wake up at 5 a.m
every day and do 100 push-ups and eat a
power shake for breakfast and then our
work by 7 a.m we see those people as
hyper motivated but they're only really
hyper motivated towards specific types
of external rewards that we have decided
as a society is what we value but it's
possible that you are actually
incredibly motivated and incredibly able
to be disciplined if you were to pick a
goal that actually fit with the life and
the process that you want so for example
i told you at the beginning of this
video i would rather be lying in bed
reading a book for seven hours right and
even i use that as an example of a lack
of discipline however if i were in bed
reading a book i would probably be
reading a book that would ultimately
help me gain new perspectives or new
thoughts or ideas on things that
eventually i would naturally want to
teach and funnel back into the world and
maybe make videos about and so for me
that actually though it would appear on
the surface to be a lack of discipline
maybe be bringing me ultimately towards
a place where i can show up more
authentically in the world as the person
that i am which is someone who loves to
consume wide varieties of information
integrate that information and then
share it with other people my process of
getting there just would not look the
same as a tj who is at their desk at 7am
every morning because we are not working
towards different end goals and i think
that a lot of the time with enfps and
infps specifically they talk about
themselves as though they have no
discipline when really what they don't
have is a clear idea of what their end
goal is and if you do not have a good
idea of what your end goal is it's
actually not a great thing to have a lot
of discipline because that means that
you would be spending all of your energy
kind of going around in circles right
discipline is kind of like the gas in a
car so if you have a full tank of gas
but all you're doing with it is driving
in circles you're actually better off
just sitting in a parking lot and not
filling your gas tank up at all because
wasting your energy on discipline in a
direction you don't necessarily want to
go in means that you are missing out on
the other life lessons and life
experiences you could be gathering in a
non-disciplined way that would
ultimately become very useful for you so
bringing this back to cognitive
functions if you don't know what i mean
when i say cognitive functions i'm
talking about extroverted intuition
introverted feeling extroverted thinking
and introverted sensing which are the
four primary areas of processing in the
enfp's brain i go over all of these in
extreme detail in my six week enfp soul
bootcamp course so if you want to learn
more about these terms you can check it
out at my website on www.heidiprev.com
i will throw the link in the description
of this video but the way that we
process as enfps is through dominant
extroverted intuition and auxiliary
introverted feeling and then our third
function is extraverted thinking right
so before we get to the place where we
can really set up a clear path forward
and really be sure of where we want to
go we first have to gather a ton of
different perspectives and explore many
different intellectual routes using n e
and then we have to decide which one we
feel most aligned with or which theories
or ideas or perspectives we feel most
inclined to build our lives around using
introverted feeling and then and only
then should we be using t e and s i to
discipline ourselves to behave a certain
way or move in a certain direction okay
if we try to bypass the first two steps
bypass that exploratory process that any
needs to figure out what it's interested
in and bypass that check-in with
ourselves that fi gives us where we're
able to align ourselves with what
actually feels meaningful for us using t
e and s i will just feel like torture
and like we are running on empty okay
discipline should never feel like you
are running on empty it should feel like
even though some days it's annoying and
some days you don't want it you are
ultimately working towards an end goal
that energizes you along the way okay i
didn't want to get out of bed this
morning i didn't want to put on my
makeup or set up my camera but i knew
that when i consistently post on youtube
when i consistently have interesting
conversations with people who are
interested in the same things that i'm
interested in i am much more fulfilled
in life and that idea that i'm working
towards a greater sense of fulfillment
in life makes it feel very worth it for
me to get out of bed for me to set up my
camera for me to put my makeup on even
on the days when i don't feel like it
same goes for health right when i don't
feel like working out when i don't feel
like eating healthy when i don't feel
like doing these day-to-day
process-oriented activities i remind
myself of the overall sense of vitality
and strength and happiness that i get
out of living in a healthy way and all
of these are examples of goals that
motivate us in a positive direction
towards an end result that we actually
want and if there is anything i believe
down to the core of my being it is that
we need to be intrinsically motivated
and we need to be moving towards
something that we find exciting in order
for discipline to really work okay now
you might have let's say a tj type
telling you i just force myself through
it i don't always want to get out of bed
i don't always feel excited about
working towards my goals but i force
myself to do it anyways and you have to
remember that you need to translate what
other people say into your own language
right so when a tj says that they are
doing things they don't like to do
they're doing things that maybe cause
them suffering i'm sure that's true a
certain amount of the time but also keep
in mind that someone who uses te higher
up in their cognitive stacking gets an
intrinsic reward and value out of doing
things in an organized way right so it's
kind of like how with fi sometimes you
can enjoy a bad feeling sometimes te can
enjoy doing something that feels
annoying in the moment because they know
they have that greater sense of purpose
around organization itself right even if
they don't like what they're doing at a
given point in time they are overall
more fulfilled when they're living in a
more organized way because they're
serving that higher value of
organization in their environment and
the same will go for you once you find a
goal or an endpoint that you want to get
to that your fi feels very aligned with
if you have a sense of purpose and
meaning as an nfp i know i absolutely
know that that will be a motivating
factor for you even on the hard days
right so if you're not feeling motivated
if you're not feeling disciplined it's
probably not because you're not forcing
yourself hard enough it's actually
probably because you're trying to do the
process wrong you're trying to move
directly to te while bypassing all of
the functions that for you come before
extroverted thinking if you can get
clear on what your introverted feeling
wants your te will step up to help you
out so will your si but a lot of the
time i think that when i see enfps
talking about this lack of discipline
what the problem actually is is that
they have not spent enough time really
moving through their extroverted
intuition maybe you're not done
gathering information maybe you're not
done figuring out which perspectives are
going to give you that flash of insight
you need to decide which direction you
want to move in right you cannot rush
that information gathering process and
unfortunately it sometimes takes many
many years
and in the meantime of course you're
going to have to do things for work
you're going to have to do things to
keep your life running smoothly that
don't always feel super exciting but if
you feel like you have so much potential
and yet you simply cannot discipline
yourself enough to get to where you want
to get to consider what might be missing
from your extroverted intuition or your
introverted feeling that isn't yet kind
of locking you into that action state
because i know me and i know you guys
and when you really have something that
you are excited about that you're on
fire with that you want to share nothing
will stop you right the discipline is
just one of many tools you will employ
to get to that end destination so i want
you to consider the fact that if you
feel like it is discipline you are
lacking so deeply it might actually be
that you don't have the necessary
conditions set up for discipline to
flourish within it's not a moral failing
it's not a measure of laziness it might
just be you not working with your
natural energy and not orienting
yourself in the direction that you truly
want to go in okay i don't believe in
laziness for a second but i do think
that in the society we live in it's very
easy to lose your sense of purpose and
direction that is the hardest thing to
find that is the hardest thing to make
decisions around but once you're able to
find what you feel aligned with and what
gives you a purpose in life everything
else in your inferior function stacking
naturally rises up to help you get to
the place you want to get to so i don't
know what my call to action with this
video is is it to be easier on ourselves
is it to consider more holistically the
way that we operate a little bit of both
once you do know where you want to get
to and you feel very aligned with it on
a true soul level not just feeling like
oh i should want that that's a
completely different thing then there
are lots of other videos of mine i could
reference for you ones around being
productive around habit formation things
like that because again we do need to
use those inferior functions as tools to
get us to our destination but do not
beat yourself up over not having enough
discipline when truly what you don't
have is a sense of meaning purpose and
direction because those things your
cognitive function stacking was built to
help you figure out if you stop fighting
yourself and let yourself actually show
up in the world as the person who you
truly are
right all right that's all i have to say
for today on this topic if any point of
the process of figuring out who you are
how to bring your natural energy to the
table and figure out where you want to
go in life in a way that is actually
aligned with who you are and not just a
product of the expectations of other
people is something that you are
struggling with or that you have
struggled with in life i do run a
six-week enfp soul bootcamp program
which you can check out on my website
where we go over a ton of information
about how to bring out more of your
natural energy and align yourself with
the kind of life you actually want to
live so i will leave the description to
that in the link of this video in the
meantime i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and i will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]
you