hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about integrity and specifically this
week we're looking at the different
blind spots that are inherent to
different insecure attachment Styles so
that's anxious avoidant and fearful
avoidant and today we're doing a deep
dive on the fearful avoidance blind
spots in
relationship now the reason this
connects back to Integrity is because
it's actually really challenging to be
in Integrity with ourselves if a lot of
our behavior is emanating from a place
in our unconscious that we are not aware
of and this is very often something that
happens anytime you have a relationship
where both parties are insecurely
attached in whatever form both people
end up feeling overtime like my partner
is 100% of the problem and the reason
why it feels that way is because
generally one's own contribution is
emanating out of a blind spot so out of
a part of our own system or our own
reactions that we are not consciously
aware of so what this video is designed
to do is not to shame or blame you for
anything that you're getting wrong in
relationships but to just expand our
awareness into ways in which you might
be impacting your relationship Dynamic
much more than you realize in ways that
are making conflicts challenging to
resolve so there's this famous Carl
Young quote that I've always loved until
we make the uncon conscious conscious it
will direct our lives and what this
whole series is about is making those
unconscious things conscious for
ourselves so that we can make more
deliberate and intentional choices
inside of our relationships and show up
in ways that we are proud up so you can
kind of think of this as just like when
you are driving down a road you want to
make sure that you are looking in your
blind spots before you merge into a
different lane or take a sharp turn you
want to make sure that in your
relationship
before you make any big decisions or
decide to change course in some way
you're checking your own blind spots
because ultimately that's going to give
you the best chance at avoiding major
collisions that don't need to happen
it's the first blind spot that I would
always encourage you to check in on if
you are a fearful avoidant who is
struggling in your relationship is are
you making the Assumption unconsciously
that you have to suppress major parts of
who you are in order to be in the
relationship
and are you absolutely sure that that
assumption is true so a very very common
thing that I see happening for fearful
avoidance is that they will get into a
relationship and over time start to feel
kind of deflated and deadened inside of
the relationship and lose attraction to
their partner and then start thinking
okay the only solution to this is to
leave the relationship and what I'm not
advocating for is staying in a
relationship no matter what right there
is of course the time to cut ties but
very often this is something that's kind
of preventable so a really common
pattern for fearful avoidance is that at
a very young age you may have
internalized a strongly held set of
rules that you now unconsciously follow
for how you ought to show up inside of a
relationship and those rules are the
things that kept you safe in your early
Dynamics which is why they feel so
important and so strong inside of you so
fearful avoidance as an attachment style
often forms an environments where the
person who you are going to to seek
comfort from is also in a lot of cases
the cause of your distress so this can
be a parent who is quite emotionally
volatile or an environment that is not
always safe but within which the same
person you feel frightened by is the
person who is responsible for protecting
you so what often happens when we have a
system that forms in this type of
environment is there are certain
emotions that we learn just do not work
to keep us safe in a lot of cases anger
is one of those feelings so we might
internalize a lot of rules around I
cannot ever feel angry at my partner I
cannot ever express anger at my partner
unless they have done something so
blatantly and obviously wrong that it's
acceptable for me to let them know we
might have rules like I must always take
care of my partner no matter what even
if it's significant ly infringing upon
things that I need to attend to in my
own life we might have rules like I
can't set boundaries for myself inside
of the relationship it is cruel and
unnatural punishment for me to have
anything that stands between myself and
my partner but the problem is that when
we have rules like this that run really
deep for us what happens is we naturally
start to lose our sense of self the
longer we adhere to these rules and this
is often why fearful avoidance on aage
tend to feel a lot more alive and
centered in themselves when they are not
in a relationship again until they start
to do this type of work to make this
stuff consciously available to
themselves suppressing something like
anger means also suppressing the part of
ourselves that knows how to set
boundaries and boundaries are really
important for keeping the parts of
ourselves that make us feel really alive
and energized and engaged in our lives
active inside of our intimate
relationships the first step is making
conscious for yourself what those rules
that you've internalized are and then
checking to see if it's true that
actually you need to suppress all of
these things inside of the partnership
in order for it to work so an example of
this is there was a point in my life
where I was in a long-distance
relationship and I had gone to visit my
partner a couple of times but they had
not yet come to visit me and the first
time we had a conversation about them
coming to visit me I immediately started
shutting down
and I noticed in the days and weeks that
followed I was running this new program
around my partner where I was suddenly
seeing all of the things I didn't like
about them all of the things I believed
being with them was holding me back from
and I really noticed my thinking has
changed around this person I was in a
deactivation response and what I
eventually realized was that I was
really uncomfortable at the thought of
having someone in my personal space I
had this program running that was
telling me if your partner comes to
visit you you need to have no boundaries
in order to make them feel comfortable
in your space that means you can never
request alone time it means you can
never turn down their bids for intimacy
it means that essentially for the
entirety of the time that they are there
you will be responsible for meeting all
of their needs but you will not be
allowed to have any of your own and the
more I became aware of this the more I
noticed how many little things were
going into this overall aversion
response that I was having towards my
partner but what was really happening
was not that they were imposing these
terrible very strict very self-erasing
rules on me what was happening was I was
imposing those things on myself and
assuming that that's what my partner
would expect from me and I still
remember going to have this conversation
with my partner at the time and it being
one of the best and most surprising
conversations I have ever had in a
relationship where I just laid out very
openly the things that I was a little
bit afraid of including my own aversion
to setting boundaries because I thought
of myself as a bad person if I were
setting boundaries with them in my space
and we had this very long very honest
conversation where they realized they
also had a whole bunch of internalized
rules that they weren't aware of and
then we were able to put all of that out
on the table and what was shocking to me
was that I finished that conversation
and felt more energized more alive and
more attracted to my partner than I ever
had at any point in our relationship
because I had brought myself into it I
had brought my own vulnerability and my
own concerns and my own thoughts and
feelings into the dynamic in an
Unapologetic way which does not mean an
unkind way it just means I brought it in
without the sense of nagging guilt that
I shouldn't do that attached to it and
so because I was able to bring it in in
that relatively neutral way my partner
was also able to receive it in a
relatively neutral way and we were able
to get somewhere with it and find some
boundaries that worked for us as a unit
and as a kind of side note when I was
planning out this video and thinking
about what I wanted to say within it
originally the first blind spot that I
wanted to propose was that you might not
be bringing your needs into the
relationship as a fearful avoidant that
didn't quite sit right with me because
when I was really deep in my own fearful
avoidant patterning the word need in a
relational sense meant almost almost
nothing to me like when other people
would go around talking about their
relational needs I was like I actually
don't know what you guys are talking
about like I feel very comfortable
meeting my own needs and then anything
that I get from a partner is just an
extra and it took me a long time to
realize that that is not the case
because to be in a partnership that
actually works it means you're going to
need to negotiate the boundaries that
you set as a couple and that requires
you bringing to your partner hey here's
what I really need to feel comfortable
in this relationship and also to feel
energized and alive in my life and how
do we figure out how we can form our
boundaries around those things so that
both are possible and you cannot do this
without help from the other person so it
requires that vulnerability of you being
able to say here's what I'm afraid of
here's maybe what I'm not very good at
and that might be setting boundaries it
might be speaking up for yourself and
advocating for your own needs but the
more you can bring those things in the
better a chance you're going to have at
allowing the relationship to mold around
the two people that you actually are as
opposed to this list of rules that you
have running in your unconscious mind
because a lot of those rules probably
don't apply anymore and any relationship
that is actually healthy and alive and
dynamic is constantly changing the rules
and adapting to fit the needs of the two
people who are co-creating it so that's
the first blind spot that we want to
look at which unconscious rules am I
assuming are true here and can I check
to make sure that they're actually true
before I allow myself to grow
increasingly resentful and deadened
inside of this relationship and then
break it off because I had these
assumptions about what was required of
me that may not ever have been true
blind spot number two that I would
encourage you to check if you are
fearful avoidant and struggling in any
aspect of your intimate relationships is
ask yourself the question am I aware of
how my own inconsistency might be
affecting my partner and the way that
they are responding to me and what we
want to do here is not shame ourselves
because I know that to be fearful
avoidant means to have a pretty strong
awareness of your own inconsistency and
to have that often be categorized in the
bad partner part of your mind but it is
genuinely a blind spot that a lot of us
might struggle with because
chances are if you have a fearful
avoidant Detachment style you never had
a home environment that was stable
secure and accepting enough for you to
be consistently calm and vulnerable with
other people and so you're not even
aware that this is the felt sense of
what secure attachment is it's two
people who feel like to a reasonable
degree they can trust and rely on each
other and because they can trust and
rely on each other to be relative ly
consistent versions of each other for
each other that doesn't mean that
there's never fluctuations in mood or in
what's going on for them in life but it
means for the most part they trust that
their partners are going to be
consistently available for them
emotionally and physically because you
might not have a model of that that
you've really internalized in your body
it might be really surprising to you
that your partners seem kind of
chronically disregulated or deactivated
depending on their attachment Styles in
the relationship and you might not
understand at all where that is coming
from so I remember in my more fearful
avoidant days I would have so many
triggers come online that would have me
be deactivated for weeks at a time and
then activated sometimes in arguments
and then in general just confused and
unsure of whether I even wanted to be in
the relationship and I had no awareness
of how that was impacting the
relationship Dynamic itself I just
thought it's the other person's
responsibility to come to me and be
vulnerable with me and if they're not
doing that then that's their stuff I
didn't realize that it was also in large
part my responsibility to co-create a
relationship environment where my
partner felt safe and comfortable with
me and in order to do that I had to work
through a lot of my own stuff and become
aware of a lot of my own triggers and
how and when they showed up as well as
how I was showing up very differently
for my partners when I was triggered in
different directions
and so once again I'm just going to keep
repeating this this is not about shaming
or blaming ourselves it is just about
being aware of the fact that sometimes
our partner's disregulation is not just
because they can't handle their emotions
or whatever it is it's because we are
actually making them feel emotionally
unsafe by being inconsistent in our
responses to them and the way to have a
healthier relationship Dynamic is to
find ways to be more consistent in the
way that we show up for our partners
because that could go a really long way
in changing the dynamic of the
relationship itself to become a place
where vulnerability is a lot easier for
both people to access so again that's a
blind spot you might just want to check
in on especially if you can't understand
a lot of your partner's emotional
responses if I'm really honest with
myself can I say for sure that this
person feels like they are getting a
relatively consistent version of me day
to day or week to week and if not that
might be something that I need to look
at to fully understand the relationship
Dynamic and why things are happening the
way that they are question number three
that I encourage you to examine if you
are fearful avoidant particularly one
who is struggling with committing in
relationships is am I curious about my
own fear of commitment or am I shaming
myself for it and resisting it when I
find it creepy into my awareness so
another thing that I see very very often
with fearful avoidance is this strong
fear of commitment and I believe that
the fear of commitment is never as
simple as what it looks like I do have a
whole video on this that I will link in
the description of this one but
essentially what we want to be looking
at when a fear of commitment starts
creeping into our awareness and we start
looking at our partner going I don't
know if I want to be with this person 5
or 10 years from now is what is it
within that that thing within that
commitment that we are so adverse to and
this is something that we can't really
go deep into the examination of if we
are shaming oursel for our own fear of
commitment so if we're telling ourselves
you are a bad person for even
questioning this or you are a bad person
for not wanting to commit to your
partner 100% for sure really early on so
we might have these rules around once
again to be a good partner means to be
very committed and to never question my
commitment when in reality more secure
leaning people are actually quite aware
at all times of what they do and don't
like about their relationship and what
things might need to be worked on in
order for the relationship to get to a
place where they would feel comfortable
in it long term so very often what I
feel like is happening for fearful
avoidance when they're fearing
commitment is that they are actually
doing a lot of self- abandoning inside
of the relationship without realizing it
so a lot of erasing themselves in their
true wants and desires and things that
make make them feel alive again refer to
Blind Spot number one and when we are
erasing ourselves in this way what
commitment looks like is commitment to a
lifetime of self-abandonment and nobody
wants that right the reason why secure
people tend to feel pretty comfortable
with making commitments is because they
know that they are not self- abandoning
and that if things come up in the
relationship that means the relationship
Dynamic that was once working no longer
works for them and they need to find a
new equili ibrium they'll talk to their
partner about it and they'll find
something that works for them both and
when you have this kind of dynamic and
everchanging fluid approach to
relationships and to the boundaries that
need to get set inside of them it's not
very scary to think about commitment
because you know that you'll show up for
yourself and the other person in this
relationship you'll prioritize both of
your best interests and if your best
interests ever stop being aligned in a
way that's truly unresolvable then you
can also always break up in the future
but again because you might have all of
these rules internalized around how you
have to show up it might actually be
that you are afraid of committing to a
lifetime of following those rules
because you know that they keep you
feeling dead inside and so the more we
work on shaping our relationships into
these Dynamic places that have room to
include the whole of ourselves the more
comfortable we're going to start
naturally feeling with commitment
because we know that we are not going to
abandon ourselves in the process of
staying with
someone and so the first step in this
process is once again just try not to
shame yourself too heavily for that fear
of commitment if and when it does come
up for you and instead to get really
curious about it what is it about
committing to this relationship that has
me so Frozen What would have to change
for me to feel more comfortable thinking
about this person in my future again I
do have a video linked below that goes
over this in more detail so if this is
something you really recognize yourself
in you might want to go check that out
next but for now it's just something to
keep in our awareness blind spot number
four that I encourage you to check in on
if you have a fearful avoidant
attachment style is ask yourself am I
deeply aware of what comes up for me in
the moments where I feel
vulnerable and I'm not talking
vulnerable like you're sharing a
difficult part of your history that you
have gone over a thousand times in your
own mind with someone else I'm talking
about the moments where you feel
dependent
on your partner or where you are sharing
something that you're worried paints you
in a really bad light or if you're
showing up in some way that you have a
lot of Shame around so this often
happens actually in the healing process
we start realizing there are parts of my
identity and parts of myself that I
haven't ever expressed in relationships
because I have a lot of Shame around
them so this could be something as
simple as expressing anger towards a
partner for the first time and what we
want to be really careful about here is
making sure that if we already have
shame attached to the expression of
certain emotions or to certain ways of
showing up in a relationship we might
unconsciously be placing a really high
expectation on our partners to respond
perfectly to the thing that we are doing
and we might actually have a bit of an
unrealistic expectation on their
response this is especially true in
situations where our partners might have
no idea that what we're doing is a
really high stakes and challenging thing
for us and so this is something we
really want to keep in our
awareness for example let's say I have a
really hard time with taking
accountability for ways in which I have
hurt other people because I have this
rule that to be a good partner means I
will never ever cause my partner pain or
upset and so let's say my partner
expresses to me that they've been hurt
by something I did and now I have to
fight through all of this defensive
patterning inside my mind that's going
no I didn't I didn't hurt you just don't
understand me to get to the place where
I can actually hear them and go okay I
know I didn't mean to do that but this
person is telling me that I hurt them so
I'm going to try to self-regulate around
the shame that's coming up here and
actually hear that and let's say I do a
pretty good job at that and I go away
and I process what they've said and I
come back to them with an apology and I
take accountability and I show them look
I've heard what you said I see that I
hurt you and here's kind of an
explanation of what was going on for me
and now what might happen is I might
find myself in a very vulnerable state
because maybe when I was very young
anytime I admitted I did something wrong
I got punished really heavily so my
partner might not have any idea that in
this moment I am feeling incredibly
vulnerable I'm feeling kind of young and
scared of what they're going to say in
response to me taking that
accountability and then if let's say
they do not respond perfectly so they
say basically anything other than wow
thank you so much for the apology I
really appreciate what you did there and
now I feel no more anger or no more
upset around this if they do anything
other than that it might feel incredibly
hurtful because it might be hitting on a
very old wound that we have had a
Band-Aid over for like 30 or 40 years
right so when we take that Band-Aid off
and we go okay I'm finally going to do
the thing I'm going to be vulnerable in
this new way then any response that
someone has is not absolutely perfect is
going to hurt extra because the skin
under that Band-Aid is really raw and so
what we want to be aware of here is two
things one can we acknowledge to
ourselves that we're probably going to
be a little bit sensitive in the areas
where we are vulnerable and have higher
than average expectations on our partner
responses so can we be aware of that and
ideally can we communicate it to them so
let the other person know hey it's
actually really hard and vulnerable for
me to show up in this way so I'm going
to be a little bit sensitive as we
navigate through this and I just want to
let you know that so that we don't get
confused and lost if things kind of
start going off the
rails but two can we act as our own
coach through these experiences so can
we make it really really clear to
ourselves in our own mind that just
because this is an area that feels very
sensitive and vulnerable for me does not
mean that my partner is not allowed to
have their own full range of responses
to whatever I bring to the
table right they don't owe me the
perfect response they are also allowed
to be human in these moments and to have
their own responses so what this is
about is just noticing which areas we
feel particularly raw around especially
in the healing process as we're trying
to show up in new ways and making it
clear to ourselves and our partners if
we can that these areas are really
challenging for us which means there's
high potential for us to get
disregulated as we're navigating through
them and the more we can just make that
apparent to ourselves and the other
person the more context everyone has on
what's Happening
holistically I remember one time having
an interaction with a partner where I'd
shared something that was really
personal for me and that felt very
vulnerable to share and my partner
didn't really pick it up they just kind
of brushed past it in conversation and
started talking about something else and
I started feeling really resentful about
that and really angry and so I brought
it to them a couple of days later and
and they were extremely surprised to
find out that sharing that thing had
felt vulnerable for me and they told me
that just wasn't the read that they were
getting based on the way that I was
talking about it and so once we got
clear on that then we were able to
return to the conversation with the
sense of intention that I had wanted to
have placed on it but again it required
me to Advocate a little bit for my
experience inside of the relationship
and go hey I actually really need some
attention on this thing this is really
important to me and again if we're
fearful avoidant that can be challenging
for us to do so we just want to keep all
of this in our awareness as much as is
possible as we navigate through our
close
relationships and the fifth and final
blind spot I just want us to draw some
awareness to if you are fearful avoidant
and you're struggling in your
relationships is am I looking at fault
in this relationship as a very black or
white thing so once again to be fearful
avoidant means to have triggers that
send you into activation responses which
puts you in more anxious patterning as
well as deactivation responses which
puts you in more avoidant patterning so
essentially what you're chronically
doing is switching world viws because in
anxious patterning you have the
worldview of I am not okay other people
are okay and so if you're in that
patterning and you're feeling very
vulnerable in all of your relationships
you're going to naturally assume it is
the other person's responsibility
because you assume that other people are
okay and are able to take care of
themselves and their own needs in that
that state it's going to feel like well
why are these other people not coming
along to help me get back into
regulation because clearly I'm the one
who is not okay and needs help here and
so it's going to start feeling like the
onus is always on your partner when you
are in this state to fix the problems in
your relationship and to check
themselves because clearly you are not
okay and they are AO they ought to be
the one to fix things but then when you
are deactivated your worldview is going
to switch and you're going to start
feeling like I am okay I am capable of
taking care of myself and attending to
my needs and staying regulated but other
people are not okay my partner is not
able to show up for themselves and take
care of their own needs so it is my
responsibility to fix everything that is
wrong inside of this relationship
including checking my own behavior and
figuring out where I have not been
showing up perfectly and when you
Ricochet back and forth between these
two different worldviews it's a very
disorienting experience because you're
always trying to figure out
who is the person who is doing
everything right and who is the person
who is doing everything wrong when in
reality to be secure means to be aware
of what we call in attachment circles
awareness of complex causation so in
awareness of how both people are in a
lot of cases doing the best they can but
wires are getting crossed or triggers
are going off in ways that are leading
to unnecessary forms of conflict that
are really challenging to resolve but
it's not because either person is
inherently malicious or bad it's just
because relating human to human is a
hard and complex thing and it requires a
lot of unpacking of everybody's
unconscious programs as well as their
conscious ones and everybody's
unconscious and conscious expectations
and doing a lot of negotiating around
how to figure out how to make a
relationship work for the two unique
people who are inside of it so this is
just another one to stay a Ware of if
you find yourself ricocheting between I
am the person who does everything wrong
and needs to fix the entire relationship
and my partner is the person who is
doing everything wrong and the onus to
fix the relationship is 100% on them
this is a false dichotomy and what
actually needs to happen is probably
that both of you need to expand your
awareness about both what's happening
for you inside of the relationship but
also what's happening to the other
person and how you can navigate around
each other's triggers and defense
mechanisms as best as possible so that
you can actually start repairing the
relationship and growing together
instead of holding either yourself or
the other person to these ideal
standards of perfect behavior that do
not meet either of you where you are
actually at all right that's all I'm
going to say for today on this topic but
as always anything coming up for you as
you've been watching this video so any
questions any thoughts any unique
theories feel free to leave them in the
comments section below I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and I will see you back
here again really soon
[Music]