hey guys heidi preeb here this week i am
trying a new thing where i make shorter
videos and see if i am capable of doing
that i find it funny when people are
like oh i don't know what to talk about
to pass the time i'm like i
think so much in words that it is very
difficult for me to make short videos
where i do not overexpand on things but
we're going to try that this week and
see how it goes so today i wanted to
talk about three early signs that you
are healing from the fearful avoidant
attachment style and these are going to
be things that might not be as dramatic
or as profound as you might hope but
they're more like signposts that kind of
show you you're on the right path to
changing the way that you show up
interpersonally and independently so i
made another video called the four signs
of attachment healing where i drag the
process of attachment healing through
the model of conscious competency where
we basically talk about how at first you
are playing out your patterning without
being aware of your patterning then at
stage two you are playing out your
patterning but you are aware of your
patterning stage three is when you're
able to show up in a different way but
it takes conscious and intentional
effort and stage 4 is when you're able
to show up in a different way without
conscious and intentional effort so most
of these signs are going to be centered
somewhere in steps two or three so
either becoming aware of your patterning
or being able to change your patterning
with conscious intention so early sign
number one that you're starting to heal
from the fearful avoidant attachment
style is that you're able to consciously
recognize when you're feeling
disorganized and you're able to refrain
from acting or making any major
decisions when you're in that state so
this is actually a piece of advice that
i stole from the therapists uncensored
podcast which is an awesome podcast on
attachment theory if you guys are ever
looking for one they talked about how if
you have a fearful or a disorganized
attachment style one of the best things
you can do for yourself is simply
recognize when you're kind of in that
state where your fighter flight system
is activated and you're not sure whether
you want to get closer or pull away and
it feels disorienting and challenging
for you to know how you want to show up
in that moment one of the best things
you can do is simply recognize that
you're in that state remind yourself
that there is a you
underneath this reaction pattern that is
calm that is stable that is able to make
well-reasoned thoughtful decisions and
decide that you're not going to make any
decisions in this state you're going to
wait until you've physiologically
returned to that baseline state in order
to consider things from a calmer place
and if you are able to do this you're
going to save yourself a lot of angst as
a fearful avoidant because when we're in
that activated disorganized fearful
avoidance state it can feel like you
don't know if you want to get closer to
someone if you want to pull away forever
but if you are able to recognize my
nervous system is on fire right now i
want to go in a million different
directions and that probably means that
i shouldn't be making major decisions or
even interacting with someone in a
particularly intense way right now it is
going to save you a lot of heartache
because you're finally going to start
recognizing my calm regulated adult self
should be the one making decisions and
if this decision is really as important
as i think it is it can afford to wait
until i've returned to that state and
i'll let that person decide okay so
obviously this takes practice but once
again sign number one that you're
heading in the direction of healing from
this attachment style is that you're
able to recognize when you cannot be
trusted to make important decisions
because you are in that dysregulated
state and having an awareness that that
state is not who you are and this is
also a really cool step because it means
that you are able to detach your
identity from your reaction patterns
right you're now able to separate those
difficult behaviors or the trauma that
you're experiencing from your sense of
self and that goes a very long way as
you move through the rest of the healing
process sign number two that you're
starting to heal from the fearful
avoidant attachment style is that you no
longer think of yourself as bad unworthy
of love or commitment phobic you simply
recognize your attachment wounding for
what it is so again this is about being
in stage two of that conscious
competency model and understanding that
the way you're showing up is not a
result of you being flawed or a bad
person or incapable of love it's a
result of the early conditioning you had
around relationships and it isn't
necessarily reflective of the way that
you want to be showing up in the world
so very early on in life i think a lot
of fearful avoidance until they become
aware of their patterning around their
attachment systems fear that they are
just flawed that they are bad people
that there's something wrong with them
this is true to an extent of every
insecure attachment style by the way but
for the fearful avoidance it tends to be
a little bit more conscious and on the
surface of their awareness so when you
begin to recognize my behavior and the
way that i show up in relationships is
not the same thing as who i am and what
my morals and values are and that a lot
of these behaviors have been reinforced
through conditioning for me but it's not
necessarily what i would choose had i
gotten to choose early on in life which
types of reactions i would have towards
relationships that is a really important
milestone in the healing process because
once again you're now able to start
internalizing that secure world view of
i'm okay you're okay instead of the
fearful avoidance default worldview
which is i'm not okay you're not okay so
growing up as a fearful avoidant you
tend to internalize i can't be trusted
but neither can other people and often
the first steps in the healing process
involve getting rid of that inner critic
and starting to learn i can be trusted
the actions that i've taken because of
the way that i was raised and the
conditioning that i had are not
necessarily indicative of who i truly am
as a human being allows you to move
closer to that i'm okay part of the
worldview right where you're able to
trust and rely on yourself because you
no longer believe that there's something
deeply wrong with you at your core sign
number three that you're starting to
heal from the fearful avoidant
attachment style is that you no longer
feel deeply critical or triggered by
people who display emotional
vulnerability so a really big part of
having any sort of avoidant attachment
style is having internalized on a very
deep level that it's not okay to show
need to show vulnerability or to show
any other emotions that you might
perceive to be kind of weak that might
have gotten you rejected early on in
life and when we internalize rules about
what we cannot do we tend to extend
those rules outward onto other people so
when a fearful avoidance sees other
people doing what they believe is
playing the victim or making a show out
of their vulnerability or exaggerating
things that the fearful avoidant was
never able or allowed or safe to do in
their early life there can be this
feeling of resentment that gets
projected outwards as judgment onto
those people right because they're
breaking this rule that's been
internalized about not showing any
emotional vulnerability so sign three
that you are starting to heal from the
fearful avoidant attachment style is
that you are okay with other people
showing vulnerability because you no
longer have to have that outer critic
active that is trying to keep everyone
else in check by following the rules
that you internalize because you no
longer believe that it is deeply
shameful to feel any of those things and
that's again going to come as a product
of your own internal work and your own
getting comfortable with feelings of
vulnerability of need of a desire for
interdependence and the more comfortable
you become in that area the less you
feel hostile and judgmental towards
other people who are open about their
experiences and their emotions it's just
kind of a justice thing right like when
you are two years old if you can't have
a toy you want nobody to have that toy
and also when you are two years old and
much younger than that if you can't have
expressions of emotional vulnerability
and need and be taken care of in
response to that you grow up believing
that it's not fair for anyone to be able
to show vulnerability and get love and
support in response to it so you might
tend to think that people are always
over exaggerating when they're putting
those things out into the world but
that's absolutely not the case and the
more healing work that you do the more
comfortable you become whether people
are exaggerating that or not right
because when we're able to properly
differentiate between ourselves and
other people it doesn't threaten us when
others behave in a way that we would not
consider it acceptable for us to act
unless it of course directly influences
us in some way so even if someone is
playing the victim exaggerating their
vulnerability making a big show out of
something that doesn't need to be a big
show we're able to just disconnect from
that recognize that's something they're
going through it has nothing to do with
me and quiet that outer critic because
we've realized we can have different
rules for the way that we run our own
lives and the way that other people run
their lives so noticing that outer
critic beginning to quiet is a key sign
that you're starting to heal from the
fearful avoidant attachment style okay
i'm going to leave it at that for today
but in the meantime let me know in the
comments what some aha moments were for
you guys if you've started working on
your attachment style and what you're
maybe noticing is going right for you
for the first time until next time i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and i will
see you back here again really soon
[Music]
you