hey guys Heidi prep here welcome back to
my Channel today we are talking about
fearful avoidance and on-again off-again
relationships so those of you who know a
fearful avoidant have dated a fearful
avoidant or are a fearful avoidant
probably know that this type has an
extreme tendency to get into a
relationship then kind of panic and get
out of it and then spend a little bit of
time out of it and then go back in and
repeat this process over and over and
over now this won't be the case for all
fearful avoidance but it is a strong
pattern that I've noticed so in this
video I want to talk both about why this
happens the way it does and also how you
can break this cycle if it is you who is
the fearful avoidant in question and you
would like to stop going back again and
again and again to the same
relationships that you know in your gut
aren't actually working out for you so
first of all why does this pattern
happen keep in mind that fearful
avoidance have a negative view of
themselves and an negative view of other
people and this makes dating as well as
being single really difficult for people
with this patterning because it tends to
create this kind of pendulum swing right
so you'll get into a relationship as a
fearful avoidant and start feeling
really good and feeling really connected
and then as soon as it gets really
intimate and really vulnerable something
inside you kind of panics right and you
want out you feel smothered maybe you're
starting to feel that engulfment that
enmeshment you're worried that you're
not going to be able to set boundaries
you're thinking about all the limits
that are going to be placed on you if
you're in this relationship long term
and because you never really learn to
interpersonally address those worries
and concerns and to set healthy
boundaries in relationships your
instinct is to swing the pendulum in the
other direction and get out of the
relationship so I think that very often
this is the case when we see fearful
avoidance getting into relationships
particularly with people who are a
little bit more anxious than they are
their fears are likely to get activated
once the relationship goes beyond the
kind of initial fun flirting getting to
know each other phases and starts to
feel more like a real commitment that's
likely to be the time when they're going
to have that fear of intimacy triggered
and potentially initiate the
relationship's first breakup so this
breakup often happens because of that
negative view of others right the closer
the fearful avoidance gets to someone
else and the more they become intimately
connected to someone the more that kind
of disgust response that comes online
for avoidant types around emotional
intimacy gets activated and the more
they want out the problem is that once
they are out fearful avoidance often
doesn't properly grieve the relationship
what they do instead is go into avoidant
mode so they convince themselves I feel
perfectly fine that relationship didn't
mean anything to me it was the wrong
relationship I can go it alone I'm
strong I'm capable I don't need a
relationship I think there's also a
strong pattern of a lot of fearful
avoidance believing themselves to be
avoidant so the there's this total lack
of awareness around the fact that they
are kind of chronically seeking out
intimate relationships and the reason
they're doing that is because they have
this repressed need for comfort for
intimacy for closeness and when they are
single the story they're often telling
themselves is I don't need anybody I
don't need any comfort I am tough I'm
strong I'm capable I don't need to
grieve or mourn relationships and then
the second they get triggered the second
they get to a point whether it's two
weeks three months a year down the line
that they really need comfort that they
really do encounter their own
vulnerability they don't have the coping
skills to handle that internally and
often they don't have the close intimate
Connections in the form of friendships
or family relationships to find people
they can go to for True deep Comfort
around those wounds so the first thing
that comes to mind is well who is the
last person who gave me Comfort
attentiveness who didn't judge me when I
showed vulner ability and they're likely
to go right back into their last
relationship and this is one of the
biggest distinguishing factors between
fearful avoidance and secure attachment
so people with secure attachment Styles
tend to have a lot of connections that
they maintain whether they are in or out
of a relationship where the people in
their lives actually know them they know
their fears their vulnerabilities the
things they struggle with and they can
go to those people for support whether
they're in or out of a romantic
relationship with fearful avoidance
often what you'll see is this kind of
bravado socially so you'll see someone
who kind of Prides themselves on being
too cool for feelings or for being so
fast paced and fast-moving and having
this really exciting and interesting
life or someone who is really into let's
say psychology or the human mind and who
wants to intellectualize their feelings
to act socially as though they are above
them but because the fearful avoidance
doesn't let a lot of people actually get
really close and get to know their true
vulnerabilities they don't have a lot of
places they can go to for support when
they need their vulnerabilities to be
seen but often because Partnerships
become a lot more intimate and a lot
more deep for them than their other
relationships this is usually the first
place they think of going back to
instinctually when they need to feel
like they will be supported and cared
for without being judged now there is a
true barrier here that I want to address
which is that if you have a fearful
attachment style it's because of early
wounding and often it's because there's
a lot of trauma in your history
so it's not your fault it's not
particularly uncommon that you struggle
to connect with people deeply the reason
you struggle to connect with people
deeply is often because the average
person has led a very different life
than you've LED they have dealt with a
lot less trauma a lot less wounding and
a lot less of the kind of secondary
issues that come up when you have
something like complex trauma that
inhibit your ability to live in the
world in a more
I don't want to say normal but more kind
of socially linear fashion like I find
you rarely find fearful avoidance on
that kind of straightforward like school
and then get a career and then have a
family there isn't that same sort of
straight narrow progression that you see
with a lot of other people so a lot of
the time people struggle to understand
people with fearful avoidant patterning
because they have been through so much
they have often also found very
um creative and alternative ways to make
a living to form relationships to get by
in life and it's difficult for them to
find other people who can understand why
they're doing things the way they're
doing them so when the fearful avoidance
does find someone who understands them
or who takes the time to get to know
them really deeply and understand their
ins and outs it is really hard to let go
of that person because often it's really
difficult to find people you can connect
with that deeply as a fearful avoidance
who can understand you on that level so
I want to bring some kind of humanity
into this and say that it makes sense if
you have fearful avoidant patterning
that the connections you form that are
really really deep and strong you're
actually going to be a little bit more
incentivized than the average person I'm
going to say a lot more incentivized
than the average person to hold on to
those connections it's hard to let them
go because it's hard to find them
because you are in a bit of a unique
situation but then the problem is that
as a fearful avoid the more intimate you
get with someone the more stormy and
intense the relationship is likely to
get because all of these wounds come up
all of these triggers come up all of
these unprocessed traumas get brought to
the surface in a way that normally
doesn't happen when you're alone and
you're living in a more avoidant way
where you're not actively confronting
your own wounding which is why one of
the key differences between let's say
the anxious style and the fearful
avoidance style is that the fearful
avoidance style often feels a lot more
calm and a lot more centered when
they're single versus when they're in a
relationship because all of that
wounding is being brought to the surface
and the anxious style feels a lot more
calm when they're in a relationship
versus when they're alone because when
they're alone is when all of that
wounding tends to get brought to the
surface so when you're fearful avoidant
you break up with someone it often feels
good for a little bit until it doesn't
right until something happens until some
sort of Crisis comes up until you need
support on something or maybe until you
run into the person again and you see
them and all of these emotions that you
were repressing about the breakup about
the things that that person used to
bring to your life almost arrive back in
your body in a way that can be very
surprising and when I was really deep
and fearful avoidant patterning I
remember this happening to me like I
would run into someone who I hadn't seen
in six months and all of a sudden it was
like I would be flooded with these
emotions that seemed to come out of
nowhere like in my head I'd be thinking
I don't miss that person I haven't
really thought about them that much
since we broke up and then as soon as I
was in their presence again it was like
I could feel it all all of the things
that my body had been numbing out while
I'd been in my avoidant patterning so
there are different things that can kind
of happen here if you're fearful
avoidant that can trigger you wanting to
get back into the dynamic but without
going too much more into that I want to
start talking about how you can break
this cycle because having on-again
off-again relationships is really taxing
on the emotional system on the nervous
system it's emotionally exhausting for
for both people and a lot of the time I
think that people don't realize how
deeply fearful avoidance don't want to
be in their own patterning right it's
not fun and exciting drama it's
exhausting and it's disheartening and
it's really painful
so we're going to talk about some things
you can do if you are fearful avoidant
and you recognize that you have a
tendency to go in and out of on-again
off-again relationships what you can do
to break those patterns and start to
move in the direction of secure
attachment which is the direct inverse
of that I'm not okay you're not okay
negative view of self negative view of
others pattern that the fearful avoidant
has people with secure attachment Styles
believe I'm okay you're okay so there's
a positive view of self positive view of
others and this is a very long road but
let's talk about how we can tackle this
particular obstacle as we are walking
along that road so I think that the
number one thing that I had to learn
about breakups when I was deep in my own
fearful avoidant patterning was that it
was not time to break up unless I was
ready to commit to going no contact with
that person so in my younger years
particularly in my early and mid-20s I
had this pattern of chronically breaking
up with people but wanting to stay in
so going let's still be friends though
or let's hang out once in a while so I
would get into a relationship feel
overwhelmed by the intimacy but not
actually feel ready to lose that person
so I would break off the relationship
but ask if we could still be friends and
still keep talking to them and still
keep going to each other for support and
eventually we would end up right back in
a relationship in not too long and the
reason why this happens is because when
you have fearful avoidant patterning you
often don't think that you can set
boundaries so you didn't really learn
proper boundary settings inside Intimate
Relationships when you were a child so
now you think if I'm in a relationship I
have to have no boundaries be completely
enmeshed I can't ask for space I can't
ask for time for myself I can't ask for
anything to be different than the way
that the other person wants it to be in
the relationship and so the only way
I'll get time space alone time
boundaries is if I break up with the
person but
the key to this is learning you can set
boundaries in relationships so if you're
not ready to stop talking to a person if
you're not ready to have them out of
your life and you actually still want
them as a very consistent part of your
life chances are you're probably not
ready to break up with that person you
are just feeling overwhelmed and this is
what your attachment system is screaming
at you to do but in that case the actual
solution is to learn to set boundaries
inside the relationship is to learn to
ask directly for what you want to tell
the other person when you're
uncomfortable with something to ask for
alone time to ask for more autonomy or
space whatever it is that you need to
feel comfortable within the relationship
if you are feeling that urge to break
things off but stay friends it's
possible you need to just spend some
time sitting with the needs that are
going unmet for you in your relationship
and thinking about whether you can bring
them up and change the relationship in a
way that doesn't not require you to
break it off now on the flip side of
this if you feel quite sure you're in
the wrong relationship and you want to
break it off and your reasons for
wanting to break it off are completely
legitimate it's not about not having
boundaries or whatever it is you just
truly think you're incompatible with
that person I highly recommend you do
not try to stay friends staying friends
with an ex without crossing boundaries
or backsliding is a difficult thing to
do it requires a lot of self boundaries
and the people who are best at doing
this are probably secure people right so
unless you are a hundred percent sure
that you have Rock Solid self boundaries
that you will not turn to that person on
a night when you're feeling lonely and
look to them for some sort of comfort
and try to bring them back into this net
or try to keep leaning on them as though
they are an attachment figure you're
just not sleeping with them anymore or
whatever it is do not stay friends with
that person that is unkind to them it's
unkind to your inner child and it just
indicates you're not actually ready to
break up so when you go into a breakup
as a fearful avoidant be ready to have
no more contact with that person I would
recommend for a period of minimum six
months and this is going to be kind of
the key that helps you understand
whether you're truly ready to break up
with someone or whether you're just
freaking out because you don't know how
to set boundaries and you're trying to
take steps back and you haven't really
learned how to do that while staying in
the relationship now tip number two for
ending the pattern of on-again off-again
relationships as a fearful avoidant is
you have to actually mourn the
relationship when it ends and this can
be a frustrating thing to hear because
for the majority of my life I literally
didn't know what people were talking
about when they talked about morning
relationships which sounds ridiculous
and like sociopathic but it's true I
would leave a relationship and just feel
nothing like feel completely numbed out
emotionally feel if anything like a
little bit empowered and like I'm better
off without this I don't need
relationships I'd be very in my ego
right and what I didn't know how to do
was actually sit and feel and experience
the loss of someone that I had loved I
had no ability to stay regulated enough
to be present with my own pain
and so what I recommend if you're trying
to break this patterning is commit after
a relationship ends to a minimum again
of about six months of being alone
of not only not going back to your ex
but not covering that wound up with any
new relationship because any new
relationship you go into in that time is
kind of like putting a Band-Aid over an
unhealed wound but like a Band-Aid that
doesn't actually allow something to heal
so that when you take the Band-Aid off
the wound is still there you need to
give yourself time and space to notice
what you're missing to wake up in the
morning and remember the way that your
ex would bring you coffee in bed and you
have nobody to bring you coffee in bed
and to feel those moments where you
really miss that person and if it
doesn't happen day to day it will happen
this is why I recommend about six months
six months is a long enough period of
time that you will go through a lot of
things that trigger memories of your ex
so you might feel fine for like two
months and then on month three it is
your birthday and you wish that they
were there to come celebrate with you
and to make your day super special or
maybe there is a new album that comes
out from an artist that you and your ex
used to love and you're gonna wish you
could text them and moving through all
of those moments without covering up or
distracting yourself from the pain means
that you are actually allowing that
person to leave your system you aren't
keeping them kind of compartmentalized
in this little box that as soon as it
opens back up inside of you because you
see them or something that reminds you
of them triggers that place you suddenly
just feel the overwhelming need to go
back to them right you have to create a
period of time where you intentionally
interact with those tiny triggers with
those tiny moments where you really
deeply desperately want them back and
you have to let yourself feel that and
watch yourself get over that feeling and
only then will you be safeguarding
yourself against those future situations
where you run into them or where
something reminds you of them and
suddenly all of the memories that are
good come flooding back right you will
be stealing yourself for those moments
by conscious and intentionally
encountering them little by little over
time so something I did after leaving my
last long-term relationship was I opened
a Google doc and I filled it up with
things I wanted to tell them and things
that I wished I could thank them for
things I still felt mad at them for
things that happened to me that I wished
I could tell them but I knew that I
didn't want to disturb their Peace by
calling them up and telling them and I
still go open that Google doc and fill
out more things and it's really sad and
I usually cry while writing in that
Google doc and it also allows me to
process those emotions without
disturbing someone else's piece and
drawing someone else back into this web
because I'm having a difficult moment
that I don't know how to cope with right
so finding some sort of practice like
that writing a letter or journaling or
going to a therapist or a close friend
and talking about those times when you
miss them is how you move on and how you
grieve relationships and
I'm going to make a whole video about
this I'm sure but I think that a really
big problem with fearful avoidance is
that when we have this patterning it's
because we didn't learn to grieve
properly because the source of our pain
was often our attachment figures and so
we had to hide our pain from them in
order to stay close to them
and it created this kind of impossible
scenario internally where no one was
ever around to help us process the pain
and the emotional chaos that came from
the environments we were in early on and
so we didn't learn how to grieve and let
go and allow ourselves to be supported
in that process and this might be your
opportunity to learn that skill which
very naturally leads me to tip number
three which is work as hard as you
possibly can and it will be work on
developing close intimate relationships
with other people who are not romantic
Partners this in my opinion is maybe the
most important step of healing as a
fearful avoidant period because remember
the fearful avoidant wound is the wound
of needing comfort from the person who
hurt you because when you were a child
your attachment figure was often
inconsistent and they would be maybe
scary abusive dangerous towards you in
one moment and yet you had nowhere to go
for Comfort but but that very same
attachment figure and so in your mind
this kind of idea started forming that
the person who hurt me is the only
person who can help me heal from that
hurt and if you can learn to break this
thought pattern this is probably the
single biggest hack you can possibly do
on your own attachment system is
learning to seek support not from the
attachment figure who the issue is
related to so if you have a fight with
your partner and you can learn to seek
healthy secure support which by the way
is different than let's say emotionally
venting to your friend about your
partner and just painting them as this
horrible person and getting your friend
to go yeah yeah they're terrible you
should leave them you need to be able to
express your true vulnerabilities to
other people that means going to someone
and going I feel like I don't know how
to make my relationship work I'm really
struggling and I'm afraid that if I tell
anyone what's actually going on they're
just going to tell me to leave but I
know I'm not ready to leave
because that's usually the truth right
when we're in these really high conflict
scenarios and we think that the only
person who can fix it is our partner
it's often because our partner is the
only person who has the full context
because there is a lot of Shame and
embarrassment that comes with having
fearful avoidant patterning and having
these relationships that were worried
other people will judge is being really
messed up If we're honest with them
about what's happening within them but I
think that the work really gets done
here when we find ways to seek secure
support outside of the relationship so
for me this has looked like finding an
attachment therapist so someone I can
speak to who is a professional who
understands the ins and outs of fearful
patterning and of insecure attachment
relationships and who I know is not
judging me and is not just going to tell
me get out and who's not going to
believe my ego stories when I go in with
a whole bunch of ego but who's actually
going to meet me where I'm at
emotionally and help me sort things out
from my side of the offense it's meant
joining groups like codependents
Anonymous and adult children of
Alcoholics and dysfunctional families
where the whole purpose of the group is
to unpack the patterning that you have
and to listen without giving advice to
other people's experiences in similar
situations it's meant over time
deepening the friendships I have to
include more of my vulnerable self and
less of my ego self so instead of acting
like this person who never feels
anything who is above all of that and
who never gets disregulated I now have
at least one friend I can go to and cry
in front of I can go to and admit I
don't know what I'm thinking or feeling
and that it's going to take me some time
to figure it out and the more
relationships or the more situations we
can put ourselves in that allow us that
space to be vulnerable in a way that we
normally only are with our partners the
less dependent we're going to be on any
one particular partner right so then if
we leave the relationship now our need
to have someone we can be vulnerable and
share with is no longer completely gone
and cut off from us it's now diffused we
have all of these support systems that
we've been slowly building over time so
it's no longer this pendulum swing where
okay our needs for vulnerability and
intimacy were getting met and now none
of them are getting met and we have to
completely detach from them it's more of
a centered process where in a
relationship we can be vulnerable and
share and be open with our partner and
out of a relationship we have other
support systems that allow us that same
space and again this is a really big
part of giving yourself time to be alone
if you intentionally choose to be alone
for let's say six months to a year
things will come up in that time that
you will need support for and that you
will need real support for real
vulnerable dysregulated support and in
that time if you don't allow yourself to
go back to an old partner or to find a
new one you will have to reach out to
other people and start finding support
in other ways it will force you to do
that and you probably will not do it
unless you are forced step four do
trauma work if you have fearful avoidant
patterning there is an almost 100 chance
that you have some sort of trauma in
your past that is unresolved and that
you are trying to resolve through having
these very volatile intense
relationships and the only thing that's
truly going to get you out of that cycle
is addressing the root problems at the
core so addressing why you have this
intense fear of intimacy and looking at
how and when and why it gets triggered
and what you can start working on doing
when you feel triggered other than
reacting or shutting down and I think
that the thing that makes trauma work
extra brilliant for fearful avoidance is
that it also gives you new language to
describe yourself to other people in a
way that isn't overwhelming for them so
again I think a really big problem that
a lot of fearful avoidance have is that
they can't connect very deeply to other
people because they have so much trauma
and and such an intense history of not
only what happened to them but all of
the kind of secondary coping mechanisms
that they learned to navigate the world
in a way that is different than other
people because of that trauma that they
feel very othered in their lives so
again when you feel very othered and
then you meet someone who you feel
really connected to and like they get
you and they're able to understand you
it's like a drug right and it's so hard
to let go of that person even if the
relationship is not working but if you
start developing the language and the
capacity to contain your own emotional
experience and understand your own
trauma and your own trauma responses in
a way that allows you to communicate it
to other people without feeling like
your soul is bared and you are
completely vulnerable in that moment
you're going to be able to start forming
more and more connections even with
people who don't have the same kind of
intense volatile history as you do so
this opens the door to you feeling more
comfortable and relaxed in the World At
Large and the more comfortable and
relaxed you are in the World At Large
and the more you feel like you're able
to show up as your authentic self in a
way that doesn't scare off other people
that doesn't overwhelm other people
because you've learned the skills of
containing your own experience and
Bridging the gaps between yourself and
people with let's say more traditional
backgrounds the more connections you're
going to be able to form and the more
connections you form the more at home
you will feel in the world and so the
less Refuge you will be chronically
seeking in relationships when I was deep
in my own fearful avoidant patterning I
used to feel like being in a close
intimate romantic relationship was like
being in a warm cozy home and being out
of a relationship was like being outside
in the cold but I would get this ego
about like oh I am a Wilderness survival
person I can withstand the cold like
nobody's business right and then one day
I would like look down and have
frostbite emotionally and be like oh my
God I need to get inside somewhere or
I'm gonna die and the process that I am
suggesting here is metaphorically the
process of making the outside world
warmer so when you are not in a
relationship feeling like you are still
at home in the world you still have
places you can go where you can bring
your whole self you aren't kind of
grinning and bearing it until finally
you have someone who you're trauma
bonded enough with that you can allow
yourself to be vulnerable this is the
process of making the world a place that
you belong in so you can go inside of
houses when you want to because the
house looks really nice but when you're
outside you're pretty comfortable there
too you don't need this huge ass ego to
survive it so the last point I'll kind
of rest on for today is that this
on-again off-again cycle truthfully will
not end until you like yourself and I
don't mean like yourself like take pride
in how much pain you can withstand take
pride in how needless you are take pride
in how much you can take care of
yourselves and other people without ever
asking for anything or needing any help
or support or Comfort I mean until you
like yourself enough to accept that you
are a human being who needs all of those
things who needs care support Comfort
support networks who needs to be seen
for who they truly are not just in their
romantic relationships but in their
friendships in their work if possible
like y'all if you had told me five years
ago I would be making a YouTube channel
where I talk chronically about my own
attachment wounding and about
experiences I've had I would tell you
there was no way in hell I would ever
become that comfortable in the world
there was no way in hell and here we are
so there is a way in hell for you to get
there and it truly does require Going
Through Hell at certain points but the
other side of it is a place where you
can just be who you are in the world
probably for the first time breaking
fearful avoidant patterning means
breaking the cycle of feeling like the
only place you can go for Relief is the
same place that is the source of your
anguish and guess what if you can break
that pattern it also becomes a lot
easier to stay in relationships because
when you have a fight or an attachment
rupture with your partner you're no
longer desperate to fix it desperate to
get it back to normal right away because
now you have friends you can go to who
you can share your vulnerabilities and
your true feelings with you have support
groups you can go to to get second
opinions and to take support from when
you are in a period where you need a
little bit more of it so all of these
very intense expectations that you
normally put on a partner you're now
going to have a diffuse experience of
outside of the relationship which makes
it easier to both be in a partnership
because problems do not feel as drastic
and as heavily weighted as well as to
leave a partnership if it's not working
because you have that love support and
warmth all around you when you step
outside of that house alright I think
I'm going to leave it there for today
when it comes to fearful avoidance and
on-again off-again relationships let me
know in the comments what about this
resonated for you what you would still
like to see discussed about fearful
avoidance and I will do my best to
answer as many questions in future
videos or in the comments as I possibly
can
as always I love you guys I hope that
you are taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]