hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we've been
talking about self-esteem and today I
want to get really into the nitty-gritty
details of how believing that your needs
are unimportant or destructive inside of
intimate relationships can erode both
our sense of self-esteem and our
relationships themselves so for a lot of
this month we've been talking about
self-esteem in a very individ ual istic
way so what we can do and what we can
work with inside of our own
self-concepts and our own set of beliefs
about our s and the world that help us
gain a sense of integrity and
self-respect but all of us are social
beings who exist inside of relationships
and who grow through relationships So
today we're going to get into a
particular wound that I think holds a
lot of people back from developing a
sense of self-esteem around their
ability to be a healthy partner in
Intimate connections and that belief is
the belief that our needs or our wants
particularly when they are in conflict
with someone else's are inherently bad
or wrong and this is a belief that I
believe is quite common for people who
have either complex PTSD so early
relational trauma fearful avoidant
attachment Styles who've played the role
of the family scapegoat or a number of
other early developmental mental wounds
that have essentially caused you to
start thinking of needs and desires
inside of relationships as a Zer sum
game so when we are thinking of
something as a zero sum game essentially
what we're doing is believing that one
person's gain is necessarily the other
person's loss so if I have a need inside
of a relationship I might have this
inherent idea that if it conflicts with
a need my partner has we have to figure
out who need is going to Prevail or if I
have a desire that conflicts with my
partner's desire I might think that it's
only possible for one of us to end up
satisfied and the reason why we might
develop a belief like this is because it
may have been true for us in our early
environments so we may have found
ourselves consistently in situations
where we were let's say shamed for
having specific needs or wants or where
we were consistently told we were
selfish for asserting what we need or
want rather than having an explanation
given to us about why that need or want
couldn't be satisfied so what I want to
do today is first get really clear on
how this belief we may have developed
that having needs or wants that conflict
with the needs and wants of people close
to us makes us a bad person is
absolutely a self-fulfilling prophecy
that only leads to further deterioration
in our idea of ourselves as capable and
competent Partners whether that means
partners in an intimate relationship a
romantic relationship or even a close
friendship or a work relationship but
essentially any scenario where two or
more people are heavily relying on each
other so we're essentially talking about
what happens when our needs themselves
and our desires become shame bound if
you don't know what I mean when I say
the term shame bound I will link a
couple of videos in the description of
this one that go over the concept of
toxic shame and shame bound emotion
but what we're working with here is
essentially the idea that there is
something wrong bad or flawed with you
for having needs and after we talk about
how this plays out we are going to get
into how to do it a different way so how
to approach your needs getting met in a
relationship through a more secure
framework where each person's needs are
not in competition with each other and
where it is a positive sum game so where
win-win Solutions can easily be found
so without further Ado we're going to
get into a very clear overview of why
the belief that having needs in a
relationship makes you a bad person
becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy that
can be broken so we're going to start
with this belief itself so you enter
into a relationship of any sort with
this idea that is almost always
unconscious if I have a want or need
that is in conflict with my partners it
means I'm a bad person and then what
inevitably happens at some some point in
the relationship a want or a need you
have that is in conflict with what your
partner wants or needs arises and when
that need arises one of several things
might happen the first thing that might
happen is that need makes it into your
conscious awareness and this is not
always going to be the case particularly
when we're dealing with things like
avoidant attachment strategies or
complex BTSD and triggers those needs
can be heavily repressed and we're going
to talk about that after the fact but in
the situation where the need does make
it into our conscious awareness and we
believe that it makes us a bad person to
want something that is different from
what this person who we are committed to
or in relationship with wants the first
option we have is to punish ourselves
internally for being aware of that want
or need so to kind of double down on
that belief that I am such a selfish and
bad person whose wants are not as valid
as other people's or whose needs are
selfish relative to other people's and
then we can double down on people
pleasing so giving our partners more and
more of what they want while hiding and
obscuring what we want so that our
partners don't see that we are bad
people which is what we believe about
ourselves the problem is that this often
turns into resentment in the long term
because the more that we are pushing
down our own wants and needs and
satisfying our partners the more
frustrated we internally become because
of course what we want to need is not
getting seen or acknowledged the other
option is that we could unconsciously or
consciously villainize the competitive
need
so if we see our partner as having a
need that is in competition with ours if
we can convince ourselves that our
partner's need is bad or wrong it means
we are allowed to have our need and so
this can breed a sense of unconscious
competition between partners for getting
their needs met which often leads to a
sense of guilt or betrayal depending
upon whether or not we win or lose that
fight so we might get our way and then
feel guilty about it or we might fight
for our need and lose which might lead
us to feeling betrayed by our partner so
neither of these are ideal outcomes
another thing that might happen when we
have a want that's in competition with
someone else's arise is that we might
partially but not entirely repress it so
what that means is that we may have some
inkling inside of our relationship that
ooh I'm not really comfortable with the
direction that this is going in or maybe
with the pace that the relationship is
moving at or with certain compromises
that my partner wants me to make but I
have this core belief and again this is
happening unconsciously that to be in
relationship means to suppress my own
wants and needs and to cater to my
partners so there might be this
unconscious contract that at one point
in your life you made inside of your own
mind and body that goes to be in close
connection or to be in an intimate
relationship means I have to suppress my
needs and I have to cater to my partners
the problem is that your partner might
not have the same contract so they might
be consistently expressing their needs
and wants and assuming that if you're
not expressing yours it's simply because
you are genuinely aligned with theirs
and you might start to see their
expression of their own needs and wants
as a violation of this intrinsic
contract that you have inside your own
mind that goes to be in relationship you
have to suppress your authentic wants
and needs and you might start to feel
like this is so unfair why do they get
to say what they want and what they need
why do they get to call all the shots
when I can't say what I want or need not
realizing that that's actually a
condition you have placed on yourself
and that your partner might not have any
idea you're operating within so this can
once again lead to a sense of resentment
if you perceive your partner to be
breaking that rule that you yourself are
so diligently adhering to inside of your
own mind the other thing that might
happen as a result of this implicit
contract is that you might start to feel
as though you deserve some form of
reward for repressing all your wants and
needs when again the other person might
have no idea that you are doing that so
to kind of highlight what this might
look like I always have this memory come
up of someone I once knew who invested
in this business and started really
working themselves to the bone on this
particular project that their business
partners were really interested in but
the longer longer they went on with this
project and the more work that they did
on the project the more miserable they
became and a big part of that was
because this project was not something
that this person actually wanted to do
they felt that they were repressing a
lot of their natural energy and interest
in order to do this project and so over
time they started burning out the longer
they worked on it but they also started
to develop more and more resentment
towards their co-workers even when their
co-workers were doing way more of the
work and eventually this person came to
the conclusion that the reason they were
feeling so resentful was not because
they were doing more work than other
people but because they were suppressing
more of themselves in order to do the
work and there was a part of them that
was just desperate for recognition for
recognition of how hard they were
working to keep their authentic self and
their authentic Tendencies and the ways
that they liked to approach work at Bay
but none of their co-workers had any
idea that this was the case for them
because they hadn't said so they hadn't
started out the business relationship by
being clear on how they liked to do
business and how they liked to take on
projects and what types of work were
exciting for them versus what weren't
they had gone in with this implicit idea
that to be in a close connection and in
this case it's a professional connection
meant to suppress the things that you
like or want or are interested in and to
do things other people's way but then
once again there is that expectation
that they would be rewarded for that in
some way when in reality in a business
setting we get rewarded for the value of
what we produce and because this person
was stifling all of their natural energy
they weren't producing things of Great
Value so it became this self-defeating
Loop where the more victimized they felt
the less they were able to produce and
the less they were able to produce the
less reward they had and the less reward
they had the more Vic VI imized they
felt and this is in many ways the exact
same type of loop we can get stuck in in
close relationships so I am suppressing
so much of me to be with you but you
don't know that but the more I suppress
the more dead inside I become and the
more dead inside I become the less my
partner probably likes me or feels like
engaging with me because my energy is
now very stifled and weird and maybe I'm
getting a bit depressed but the more
that I'm stifling the more kind of
unconsciously entitled I de to some sort
of compensation for how hard I am
working to hold myself back and to hold
back my own needs and wants and this can
once again lead to a deep sense of
resentment and we might have no idea how
we ended up with that deep sense of
resentment because all of this is
happening on a largely unconscious level
if this is a product of attachment
wounding or trauma we might not have any
idea of the fact that it's even possible
to feel alive live and engaged inside of
our relationships we might think that it
is a necessary tradeoff to abandon
ourselves in order to be close to people
and the people who end up paying the
price for that are both us and the
people we're close to who we might be
subtly punishing or acting passive
aggressive towards because they're not
appreciating us for how much of
ourselves we are holding back when in
reality that was never the agreement
that they wanted to enter into they may
have actually wanted to hear more of our
descent inside of the relationship to
see more of our authentic wants and
needs and experiences and for us to
bring more of the core of who we are
into the relationship even if it causes
conflict because conflict can be a
really powerful tool for bringing people
closer so there's a very deep irony here
around what gets lost when we suppress
our needs to stay in close connection
with people of course there are
relationships where both people make
this contract and they somewhat
miserably live together forever but for
those who air more secure bringing
yourself and your wants and your desires
and your needs and your conflicts into
the relationship are all tools for
building more intimacy which is what
we're going to talk about in the latter
half of this video but the last thing
we're going to go over quickly is what
happens if you have a need or a want
arise that's in conflict with your
partners but you have more or less fully
repressed that nether one so this is
often what we see with people who have
more avoidant patterning there's this
thing that happens early on where they
kind of decide without realizing that
they've decided this inside of their
minds that relationships can't really
provide them with the emotional feedback
that they need to feel whole so there's
this sense of disconnecting
energetically from the idea of close
relationships as a place where one's
needs or wants could be realized in the
first place so they might have conscious
ideas about what they want out of a
relationship maybe they want
companionship want to partner they want
to do what's kind of socially sanctioned
which is settle down and start a family
but they think of their needs as
entirely their own to fulfill and it
doesn't even occur to them that they
could have interpersonal needs that
could be satisfied through a
relationship and so of course this also
becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy when
we enter into relationships without an
awareness of what our relational needs
are or what we want to take from the
relationship what ends up happening is
we hold ourselves responsible for
complete and total self-regulation so
taking care of everything on our side of
the fence but then we start to realize
that our partner has needs that they
might be perfectly comfortable
expressing and that can go a number of
different ways one it can lead to an
intense sense of pressure so this
feeling of relationships are a burden
when I'm in relationship I have to tend
to all of my own problems and regulate
all of my own emotions and now I also
have to do do this for another person
and this other person's needs can also
serve as a threat to the things that are
keeping me self-regulated so maybe they
want more of my time and maybe I don't
want to be very flexible with my
schedule because the way that I've built
up my life keeps me heavily regulated
and this person imposing their needs
into my life is now starting to threaten
what I do to keep myself feeling okay so
keeping up with the demands of
self-regulation and regulating another
person can start to feel like an
incredible sense of crushing pressure
and that pressure if it reaches a
boiling point can lead to the need to
disconnect from the relationship which
consciously is just going to register as
the need for space the need to pull back
the need to do something to relieve
oneself from the overwhelm of tending to
two people's needs without taking any
significant form of co-regulation out of
the relationship because what secure
people know is that when you enter into
relationship what you're doing is
figuring out how and where you can
co-regulate with each other so you no
longer need to do 100% of the things
that you are doing to keep yourself
regulated prior to being in the
relationship you're still going to want
to have a lot of that online and that's
important but making room for a
relationship means being willing to have
some of your needs met interpersonally
and in exchange meeting another person's
needs interpersonally but if you have no
idea that that's possible because you've
never done that or felt that or been
able to take significant and meaningful
things out of a close relationship
that's not even going to be on your
radar so you might kind of work to meet
multiple sets of needs until you get
overwhelmed notice a need for space and
that might lead to a temporary or
permanent abandonment of the
relationship because you aren't aware
that there's another way to go about it
the other thing that might happen if
you've repressed your interpersonal
needs is that you might have a lot of
contempt for most people who you try to
date because you might see anybody doing
anything other than perfectly meeting
100% of their own needs as someone who
is needy and incompetent when in reality
you might just be working with someone
who has healthy relating skills and who
understands that relationships are about
finding someone whose needs you like
meeting in some ways and vice versa and
joining forces together because it's
something that's mutually beneficial for
both of you because that's a more
enjoyable way to spend your life than
being on your own and meeting all of
your own needs
but again if this is the opposite of the
worldview that you've internalized you
might see even very secure people as
very clingy and needy which might lead
to a lot of contempt as the relationship
goes on and contempt is absolutely a
killer of intimacy because as soon as we
have contempt for someone we're no
longer seeing them as on our level and
as someone who we could have a healthy
given take with we're looking at them as
someone who needs to be taken care of
which is once again not a all a recipe
for healthy intimacy and ultimately all
of this leads to a power imbalance
inside of relationships because if one
person believes that they're completely
responsible for themselves and the other
person's needs now they're kind of
holding all of the cards in the
relationship they're not taking anything
out of it in a significant energetic way
and so the other person probably doesn't
feel particularly valued or respected
which once again is pretty important for
having healthy relationships
so all of these things if we look at the
Endo of all of these patterns of belief
that all stem from that same idea I am a
bad person if my wants and needs are in
conflict with my partners well this
belief is actually intended to help us
check ourselves so we probably formed it
early on in life because we were raised
in an environment where in some way
needs were a zero some game this belief
that we think is keeping us in Integrity
is accidentally and totally
unconsciously leading us to all of these
results at the bottom of the chart here
abandonment contempt power imbalances
resentment self-punishment villainizing
our partners for having normal wants and
needs and all of this ends up
deteriorating our relationships over
time and when our relationships
consistently deteriorate over time and
we don't understand why often it brings
us right back to that core belief that I
am inherently bad or wrong something
about me is just flawed or broken in a
way that causes other people distress if
they get close to me and it might feel
like the most counterintuitive thing in
the world to believe that actually the
problem is we're not bringing enough of
ourselves into relationship that we're
not putting enough of our needs wants
and authentic desires on the table but
what we're going to do now is look at
what happens when we do start doing that
so when we start shifting that internal
belief seeing our own needs and wants as
valuable and actually vital to
maintaining the health of a relationship
and start acting based on that belief so
this is where we start shifting from
thinking of relationships as a zero sum
game to thinking of them as a positive
sum game so starting to believe that in
relationship the whole is greater than
the sum of the parts so when you stop
pitting yourself unconsciously against
your partner and trying to figure out
whose needs are going to get met you can
actually start working together to find
Creative Solutions for meeting both of
your needs in a way that is more
powerful than what you may have
individually arrived at if either one of
you had won that needs competition game
so we're going to switch out this core
belief that it's bad and shameful and
wrong to have needs or wants that
conflict with your partners to a much
more neutral one which is that it is
normal to have needs and wants that
conflict with your partners or with
other peoples
not good not bad just normal just a
thing that happens that's just part of
being alive it happens to every couple
to every group of people to every family
unit there are inevitably many many
times where people's wants and needs
conflict with each other and that
doesn't make anybody involved inherently
selfish bad or wrong it's just a fact of
being alive and existing in Social
environments so when we take the shame
out of this and when we just look at it
as a neutral fact of life what happens
is now when a want or a need arises for
us that's in conflict with the wants or
needs of the people around us we can
relax and we can accept that something
perfectly normal is happening so we
settle into that I'm okay worldview and
what we can actually do here is start
looking at that need or that want or
that perspective that we have that's in
conflict with someone else's
as just a piece of a greater puzzle well
holding the reality that our partners or
our family members or whoever it is that
we're in conflict with has a different
piece of the puzzle and if we want
anything really generative to come out
of this we're going to have to be
willing to put all of them on the table
without framing it as a
competition so when our wants and needs
are not shame bound what we're able to
do is just go to the people we're close
with and let them know in a calm and
neutral way hey there's somewhere where
we're not aligning here here's my
perspective can I also hear yours can
you let me know more about what your
wants and needs and values are in this
area and this is the internalization of
that your okay worldview right so to be
securely attached means to have a
positive representation of both self and
other internalized so just as much as
you believe my wants and needs do not
make me wrong or bad or shameful you
also understand that other people's
wants and needs even when they're in
conflict with yours don't make them
wrong or bad or shameful it just
presents a problem that the two of you
can work on solving together and so once
you have both perspectives really
fleshed out and on the table you can
enter into discussion and negotiation
which are skills that you probably did
not learn if you grew up in a
dysfunctional family dynamic where needs
were competitive instead of looking at
and spending time with all of the
individual wants and needs you may have
gone immediately into attacking each
other and trying to figure out who could
dominate the other whereas in a secure
Dynamic it's more about figuring out
what Creative Solutions you can come up
with by putting all of that information
out there so I think I've told this
story in videos before but I'll never
forget the first more secur leaning
person I ever dated when I was still
deeply in my fearful avoidant patterning
who looked at me one day and said hey
I've noticed that you seem to always
think you have to have the answer in an
argument but to me it feels like if we
just both talk about what we want we
might be able to find some third
solution that neither of us was
originally thinking of and that kind of
blew my mind because it was a
fundamental change in the way that I
approached conversations about needs in
my mind every conversation about needs
was a competitive conversation it never
occurred Ur to me that we could align
look at both of our needs and wants and
kind of put our heads together to find a
solution that neither of us was able to
see independently but in Secure Dynamics
this is exactly what happens through the
process of exploring each other's needs
we develop empathy for each other and
inside of that empathy we're able to
arrive at more embodied relational
decisions that truly work for both
people because neither is devaluing the
other's needs so there's a sense of
equality
which can only come out of Dynamics
where we feel as though we are truly
being valued and valuing the other in
relatively equal measure and through
that equality comes a sense of
appreciation for yourself and the other
and when we have that deep empathy and
appreciation for each other we want to
find those win-win Solutions we're not
looking at the other as the enemy we're
looking at the other as a person who we
care about and love and want to find a
way to work with and there is a sort of
deep irony to the fact that the way we
arrive at this place of empathy is
through first empathizing with our own
needs and seeing them as inherently
valuable and okay and it's only once
we've given ourselves deep permission to
have needs to have desires to have
things that we want regardless of
whether they are in alignment with what
other people want that we're able to
hold that same empathy for other
people's desires values and needs needs
and when we have that Mutual sense of
appreciation and reverence for each
other's perspectives then we're able to
arrive at much better and in some cases
almost magical seeming solutions that we
didn't see before and this is where we
really start to grow through intimacy
and through our relationships because
until we are actually energetically open
to another person and to their
perspectives and experiences that differ
from ours we aren't really able to allow
ourselves to be changed through
relationship it's something that we just
aren't particularly open to if we are
spending all of our time defended and
when we start to see the beauty of being
changed through relationship and what
can happen when we put our authentic
selves on the table and are met by
another person who's able to do the same
is we start to see how beautiful it is
to not be so fixed in our own identities
and to be open to other people's
inflence influence and the more that we
open ourselves up to that the more our
self-esteem ironically begins to grow
because we see that we are not the only
ones holding all the cards that we don't
have to be responsible for every
decision in our lives and for making
sure that we get everything right and
when we can relax into that sense of
interdependence it makes us feel safer
more relaxed and more okay in the world
and it also reminds us that we are
capable of compromise and of giving
deeply to relationships which is a
wonderful thing for our
self-esteem and a wonderful thing for
our growth in general so this process is
one that needs to be learned and
practiced over and over and over again
it starts with becoming aware of when
you have a repressed need inside of a
relationship so you might notice it when
you start feeling resentful that might
be the time to step back and go which
kind of implicit contracts have I
projected onto this relationship that
are not getting fulfilled and that I'm
feeling resentful over it might mean
checking yourself when you're feeling
really defensive or like you're in
competition with your partner and asking
yourself what would it mean if it were
just okay that they have one need and I
have a different need and what if this
was not a zero sum game what if one of
us didn't have to win this competition
but what if we just allowed all the
facts to be what they are and gave
ourselves the gift of putting all of our
needs and wants on the table and seeing
what happens when we spend time
exploring each other's without any
attachment to outcome it might mean
noticing when we see Power imbalances in
our relationship or when we're starting
to feel contempt towards our partner
what am I believing I can't possibly get
out of this relationship that I think I
do need to give and it might mean
undoing a lot of the really deep core
beliefs we have about what it means to
be in relationship in the first place so
like everything the more we work through
our attachment wounds our developmental
challenges our trauma triggers the
easier all of this work becomes but for
today I just want to draw our attention
to the fact that this very belief that
we think is keeping us so safe and that
is protecting our integrity this belief
that our needs make us bad might
actually be deteriorating it and this
might be the starting place for changing
the way that we are showing up in
relationships ironically believing that
our needs and wants and desires and
authenticity matters is often the
kindest thing we can do for ourselves
and other people in the long run all
right I'm going to leave this at that
for today as always let me know in the
comments what's coming up for you as you
go through this video I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other
and I will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]