hey guys heidi preep here if you are new
to this channel welcome we talk about
all things personality theory attachment
styles and basically any theory or
system that can help you gain a better
awareness of who you are who other
people are and how you can bridge that
gap in a healthier way
so this week we're going over the four
attachment styles anxious avoidant
fearful avoidant and secure and talking
about how their early experiences shape
their attachment style so attachment
styles for the most part are formed
before the age of two or three but they
do change and develop with us over the
course of our lives so the way that we
respond as infants is not exactly the
same as we respond as adults because
adults have more sophisticated
experiences of attachment bids but the
inner mechanisms the kind of inner world
view about how relationships are and
what we have to do to get our needs met
in relationships are formed very young
and our brains kind of neurologically
wire themselves around that worldview
which is why our very early experiences
of attachment tend to be the ones that
follow us through our lives and give us
kind of a schema for what we expect out
of relationships for better or for worse
and with the anxious attachment style we
often find that they expect a certain
level of disappointment in relationships
there is often this sense of someone is
going to leave or abandon me or let me
down and so i have to make sure that
that doesn't happen and this will be the
kind of conscious experience of the
anxiously attached adult right but they
might not know where that comes from
they might also not be aware that not
everyone feels that way but what we're
going to talk about today is the early
experiences that shape that world view
for anxiously attached adults as well as
how that world view can begin getting
undone because the brilliant thing about
attachment styles is that they are not a
life sentence if you are able to
consciously recognize your attachment
style as an adult and do focused
intensive work on it you are able to
move from any of the three insecure
styles to a secure attachment style
which serves as a positive predictor for
many wonderful things including
healthier more long-lasting
relationships a healthier relationship
to yourself and in general overall
health and wellness and in a future
video we're going to talk about why all
of those things come into play with
secure attachment but for now what you
need to know is that these tendencies
are not something you're stuck with if
you see yourself in them we're just
going to start by figuring out how this
came to be in the first place and only
then can we start working to loosen that
world view and start choosing healthier
more fulfilling responses so with the
anxious attachment style their very
early experiences of being cared for
were often fairly inconsistent now this
can happen for a variety of reasons
right so on kind of the extreme end of
things you can have an anxiously
attached child who grew up in a
dangerous and unpredictable environment
so maybe their parent was an alcoholic
or a drug addict and they were sometimes
very responsive and warm towards their
child but other times when they were
using or they were drunk or whatever it
is they were unable to be present for
their child but there doesn't have to be
kind of quantifiable parent neglect
present in order for someone to develop
this attachment style and that's
actually a pretty common
misunderstanding you can have a parent
who's inconsistent despite the fact that
they are trying everything they know how
to do to be attentive and there for
their child but maybe they have multiple
children to attend to and they can't
always give their new infant the care
and attention that they need or maybe
they are incredibly busy with work or
maybe they have a mental or physical
illness that they're tending to
themselves and they want to be present
as much as they possibly can for their
child but they're either physically or
mentally or both preoccupied with
whatever challenge they're going through
right
another big predictor of an anxious
attachment style in children is an
insecure attachment style in the parent
so the reason why we so often see
insecure children being born to insecure
parents is because when you have an
insecure attachment style of any sort as
an adult whether that is anxious
avoidant or fearful avoidant it means
that there are certain emotions you have
an incredible deal of trouble processing
and any emotions that you're not able to
access and process within yourself
you're not really able to teach your
child how to access and process and a
lot of parents don't know they're
insecurely attached when they have
children they might think for all
intents and purposes that they are able
to be a completely emotionally
responsive parent because their own
attachment issues might be very deeply
repressed for them that they
unconsciously reject their child when
their child is showing certain emotions
that they don't know how to process
themselves so for example if you have a
parent who has an anxious attachment
style themselves they might have a very
high degree of difficulty processing
shame so they might have this idea as
they become apparent that i'm going to
do everything right i'm going to raise
my child with all of the love that maybe
they think i never got as a child and
they might come in with the best
possible intentions but
every time their child becomes angry
that might activate their feeling of
shame because they might go i'm being a
bad parent if i were a good parent my
child would never be angry and of course
that is false thinking but the
unconscious mind doesn't stop to
fact-check itself very often right so
what you might have is an anxious parent
who now becomes panicked themselves when
their child shows anger so they're not
able to serve as kind of a safe space
for their child to come to them and
process that anger because they
themselves get dysregulated by the
child's emotional response
now the child learns okay there are some
emotions that my parent is very gentle
and loving and caring when i show but
there are other emotions that when i
show them my parents seems to get upset
almost anxious themselves about me
having that emotion and of course a
one-year-old will not have that language
right but they will be able to tune into
their parents distress and so they will
learn sometimes some emotions that i
show are well received but other ones
are rejected or ignored or denied and
maybe depending on their parents mood
that day or depending on how kind of
psychologically safe and sound their
parent is feeling in a given moment that
emotion might be a little bit more
tolerable for the parent to work with in
the child versus another day when
they're tired they're spent and that
emotion now when the child shows it
poses too much of a threat to them so
they have to find a way to kind of
subtly shut it down and for the child
this is going to be very confusing
because the child cannot yet say to
themselves that's my parents stuff it
has nothing to do with me right when you
are a baby for a certain period of time
you can't even understand that you and
your primary caregiver are different
people you kind of think that you're
part of the same unit so what the baby
learns is that if sometimes me showing
emotions gets my needs met and other
times it doesn't maybe it's because
those other times i just haven't been
clear enough about communicating what it
is so they learn to amplify and amplify
and amplify their emotional response in
hopes of getting their needs met and
sometimes this works and sometimes it
doesn't so they get used to their parent
kind of being inconsistent and meeting
their needs and they get used to
experiencing mixed signals in
relationships and this is a really
important point because you will often
see this in the anxiously attached
adults worldview they're often attracted
to partners who don't necessarily give
up what they're thinking or feeling very
easily and they get kind of hooked on
these mixed signals and they often will
tell you what i really want is a partner
who's responsive to my needs what i want
is a partner who is emotionally
sensitive and there for me but when they
meet such a partner they're often less
apt to pursue that kind of person
because their worldview of relationships
was formed around inconsistency so
they're unconsciously seeking out
inconsistency in their adult
relationships as well and generally with
anxious infants they learned that either
shows of vulnerability or shows of anger
were the most likely to get their
parents attention so that's kind of the
fun response versus the fight response
right so when you are in a fond response
or when you are showing vulnerability
you're kind of showing the other person
look at me i'm so helpless i need you to
come closer it's this response that
makes the person who's going to take
care of you feel good about themselves
and of course the baby is not choosing
this actually babies are born with these
kind of exaggerated features as a
biological response to the adult brain
responding most protectively towards
beings that they see as kind of
vulnerable and so sometimes the
anxiously attached child will find oh
when i look extra cute when i kind of
plea a little bit when i show my parent
that i really need them that's when i
get the best response or
maybe my parent is a little bit harder
to reach so they only really pay
attention to me when i get a bit angry
and frustrated and then their attention
is drawn to me and they're like oh my
kid is in need let me give them
something to calm them down or to soothe
them and often these are the responses
that anxiously attached adults end up
playing out in their attachment
relationships as well so you'll have
this kind of oscillation with anxiously
attached adults often between
vulnerability and anger in their
relationships and which of those things
they rely more heavily on is dependent
upon a wide range of things certain
children may have found that displays of
vulnerability versus anger get them what
they want more quickly there are also
more and less sophisticated displays of
both vulnerability and anger that over
the course of a lifespan the anxiously
attached person might begin maturing
into so you can have almost this adult
who looks really cool and calm and
controlled on the surface but who is
subtly trying to control their intimate
relationships through having this kind
of cool anger towards them when things
don't go the way that they want so a
child's anger is going to look different
than an adult's anger but with the
anxiously attached child we often see
these kind of initial displays of
exaggerated vulnerability or exaggerated
anger because those displays are
adaptive and that gets integrated into
the child's world view of showing my
vulnerability and showing my anger get
me what i want and those oscillating
displays of anger and vulnerability are
often played out again and again and
again in their close intimate romantic
relationships so when the anxiously
attached adult does not get what they
want they might try to go to their
partner and look especially vulnerable
or especially sexy or whatever it is
that they think is going to make their
partner kind of drop their guard and
attend to them and if that doesn't work
they might become very angry and try to
really show their partner here's what's
going on you're missing the picture i
need this from you and you're not giving
it to me and depending on what worked
best for them early in life there can
also potentially be some differences in
how they're socialized here so men often
are socialized to have anger as a more
acceptable emotion women are often
socialized to have vulnerability as a
more acceptable emotion so you may see
an anxiously attached male express that
anxious attachment a bit more through
anger and the attempts to control their
partner versus an anxiously attached
female partner might be more inclined to
go to vulnerability first and almost try
to covertly control the situation
through trying to make the other person
notice how much they've not been
attending to them and that's really not
a rule and in all cases with anxious
attachment you will have that feeling of
vulnerability and that feeling of anger
present whenever the attachment system
is activated but there might be a little
bit more conscious intention around
which one is displayed based on what the
child found worked for them very early
on in life and that will continue to be
the strategy in kind of increasingly
refined and elegant ways as that child
grows into an adult now the really
important thing to note here is that
very early on anxiously attached
children learned the way that i feel is
very important and i need to pay
attention to it and i need to
communicate it to other people because
they found that the way that they felt
was a pretty good predictor of how they
were going to act and how they acted was
a decent predictor of whether or not
their needs were going to get met so if
the parent let's say never or hardly
ever responded to the child's emotional
bids the child would learn eventually to
stop showing or displaying their
feelings whatsoever because they learn
this just doesn't work but the anxiously
attached child learned this does work so
when i have an emotion i need to display
it and i might need to display it less
or more depending on the availability of
my caregiver but eventually someone will
probably come and soothe me and help me
kind of return to a regulated state so
this is what we call co-regulation and
with securely attached people we see
both the ability to co-regulate as well
as the ability to self-regulate so what
that means is that sometimes the
securely attached adult is able to share
their feelings and lean on other people
for support and that really helps them
return to equilibrium but other times if
no one's available or just if they feel
like it's the better thing to do the
securely attached person will be able to
sit with their own feelings and kind of
soothe themselves and return themselves
to emotional equilibrium now the
anxiously attached child did learn those
co-regulation skills through the times
that their caregiver was available but
they did not learn to the same extent
the self-regulation skills so there's
this kind of blind spot as they grow up
in the area of self-regulation so the
anxiously attached child kind of grows
up feeling like when i have a strong
emotion the only way it's going to go
away is if i bring it to someone and
share how i'm feeling and the other
person helps me feel okay again by
either giving me validation or warmth or
reassurance or whatever it is that i
need and this is unconsciously still the
way that they operate as adults so with
anxiously attached adults we often see
this kind of world view of when i have a
strong emotion i need to bring it to
someone else and have reassurance or
validation or soothing given to me or
else i will not feel okay again and so
they can end up with this view of
romantic relationships in particular as
this is the thing that is going to fix
the way i feel once i am finally in a
happy committed romantic relationship i
will finally have someone available to
me to co-regulate with me and help me
soothe my emotions whenever they feel
negative now the problem is that for a
romantic relationship to be healthy it
should include two people who can
regulate their own emotions and then can
elect to co-regulate when it makes sense
to but in the case of the anxiously
attached adult that self-regulation
piece is missing and the anxiously
attached adult doesn't necessarily know
it's missing so they might just feel
like why is my partner not consistently
responsive to me and often again they're
chasing after partners who are
inconsistently responsive to start with
so anxiously attached adults often find
themselves very attracted to avoidant
partners and the reason for that is
avoidant partners have learned not to
display emotion or at least not to
display negative emotions on the surface
which leads the anxiously attached
person to believe that they don't have
those emotions or that they do have them
but they are exceptionally good at
regulating themselves which is actually
not the case with avoidant attachment we
see a repression of negative emotion
which is not the same as dealing with
negative emotion the type that is best
at dealing with negative emotion and
effectively moving past it is a secure
style but because securely attached
people readily express their emotions
and do tend to put the way that they're
feeling on the table the anxiously
attached person might see that as oh
they're dysregulated like me whereas the
avoidant to them looks like someone who
has everything under control and that
looks unconsciously like that caregiver
that they're kind of secretly searching
for in life so you often have the
anxiously attached adult chasing after
the avoidant attachment style not
knowing that the avoidant attachment
style is actually just as bad at dealing
with their emotions as they are just in
a completely different way and once they
do get into a relationship the anxiously
attached individual often becomes hyper
aware of the relationship dynamic and of
their partner's behavior and they're
always on the lookout for really subtle
changes either in the dynamic or in the
way that their partner is responding to
them because they're afraid that that
means the care and the reassurance and
the validation that they need for their
partner is going to go away so they live
with this kind of chronic feeling of
abandonment and the reason that feeling
of abandonment is so present and so
conscious for the anxiously attached
individual is because they don't know
that they can be okay on their own they
have not learned how to process and
soothe themselves through difficult
emotions because that skill was never
displayed for them as a child right if
you have a parent who let's say cannot
handle the feeling of anger in
themselves they don't model healthy
anger skills for you so you don't learn
how to resolve the feeling of anger
without someone else's help or if you
have a parent who became very
disregulated by your sadness you might
not learn to process sadness on your own
so again you're going to be looking for
a partner who's going to help you
process that feeling interpersonally but
until the anxiously attached person
learns self-regulation which is a skill
that often only comes through specific
therapeutic intervention there might be
this ongoing anxiety around being left
by their partner and that anxiety can be
so humongous that it becomes
all-consuming and that's one of the
reasons why this attachment style is
often referred to as anxious preoccupied
because they are quite literally
preoccupied by thoughts about
relationships they tend to put romantic
relationships at the forefront of their
lives and they will allow the rest of
their lives to kind of go by the wayside
in their pursuit of romantic
relationships if it comes to that and
again they might not realize that this
is not how everyone experiences life
they might think this is normal because
there is a high enough percentage of
anxiously attached people out there and
i believe a lot of art and movies and
media pieces are created by anxiously
attached people so this kind of grand
romantic ideal of a partner coming and
saving you from your life and yourself
and making you finally a whole person is
presented very readily through songs and
movies and all of these pieces of media
that we've been consuming from a very
young age so the anxiously attached
person often doesn't stop to question
whether or not that belief is true until
things start going repeatedly wrong for
them later on in life now i'm going to
put out many future videos on how we
start working with this attachment style
but to talk a little bit about it now
the anxiously attached individual's
route to healing has to come through
learning to self-soothe and also
learning to own one's own emotional
experience because the anxiously
attached child never learned proper
differentiation from their parent so
they never properly learned which
emotions are mine and which are my
parents they often still make this
mistake as an adult so let's say they
feel an emotion that feels very
overwhelming one of the emotions that
tends to be most overwhelming for people
again is shame so when something comes
up that makes the anxiously attached
person feel shame they might actually
find that intolerable their brain is not
able to process shame so they might
decide that that feeling belongs to
someone else and then try to solve the
problem interpersonally so what that
might look like is them looking at
themselves in the mirror one day and
going on disgusting and having all these
negative judgments about themselves that
they find intolerable so instead of
finding a way to self-soothe and kind of
change their mindset around that or set
goals that allow them to move more in
the direction of how they want to feel
they might go to their partner and look
for any little tiny clue or sign that
their partner thinks that they're
disgusting right and then the second
they find one it's like that entire
worldview gets validated and they go i
know that you feel this way about me and
that's why i feel so bad so there is
this psychological inability to process
certain emotions and so instead of
processing them they have to project
them outward because if it's not their
feeling it's someone else's then that
means someone else can solve the problem
for them there is not a whole lot that
is scarier for the anxiously attached
person than feeling like they are alone
with their problems so they
unconsciously have to find a way if they
have a really big emotional problem to
make it so that it's someone else's
problem too so that that person is now
drawn into helping them solve that
problem and this is not conscious for
the anxiously attached person they
really truly believe that these
projections they're placing on to other
people are true they really think
they're right about how other people are
thinking and feeling but a big part of
healing this attachment style comes
through the process of owning one's
emotions and learning when i'm feeling
this way it is probably coming from
within myself other people cannot
transmute emotions right someone cannot
take anger and place it in your brain we
can only feel happy sad angry whatever
it is through the process of our own
biology and our own minds creating those
experiences and learning that and
learning to take radical
self-responsibility is often the
anxiously attached individual's root to
healing but in order to do that they
first need help they first need an
enlightened witness someone who can help
them process those feelings that their
parents never help them learn to process
in a safe environment so that's why
therapy or support groups can be so
so helpful in healing the anxious
attachment style because as bernie brown
likes to say shame can't survive being
seen and for most of us shame is a truly
intolerable emotion and particularly for
the anxiously attached individual who
often does not know what to do with that
shame when it comes up so the more that
that projection stops happening the more
of an accurate world view the anxiously
attached person forms which allows them
to navigate the world quite a bit better
because when this attachment style isn't
conscious they tend to form a lot of
thoughts about what they think other
people are thinking and feeling about
them that are not accurate and the
problem is that they then miss the
actual thoughts and feelings that people
have about them which ends up creating
this kind of self-fulfilling prophecy so
for example a very common issue that a
lot of anxiously attached people will
face is let's say continuously getting
into romantic partnerships that end very
abruptly and the anxiously attached
person might make up a reason in their
head that isn't that threatening for why
this is happening like for example
they'll go well it's just because i need
to lose 15 pounds and if i lost the
weight if i got better at this scale if
i made more money then suddenly i would
be completely desirable and so they can
move and move and move towards these
targets not knowing the whole time that
the actual reason their relationships
keep ending is maybe because they are
consistently suspicious or jealous or
angry at their partner but because it's
psychologically intolerable for them to
process that that feeling belongs to
them they'll have this kind of feeling
of oh well i'm just always dating shady
people or whatever it is but until they
get started on the attachment healing
journey they don't even know that it's
their responsibility to stop chasing
shady people right because both things
could be true but again our partner
choice is also something that we have to
take radical responsibility for and
that's often very difficult for the
anxiously attached person to see early
on in their journey because again they
have that early worldview internalized
of my needs will be inconsistently met
and once they eventually learn my needs
can be consistently met by a secure
partner if i learn to honestly and
directly express my needs which requires
me getting in touch with them and
learning to name my feelings and
emotions in a way that i'm currently not
necessarily capable of doing they learn
that the experience of healthy
partnership can be completely different
than anything they ever imagined but of
course that is not the world view that
we start out with alright that's all i
have to say for today about the early
experiences of the anxiously attached
style if you have any questions please
leave them in the comments especially if
you have any kind of aha moments that
have occurred for you on your attachment
healing journey related to your early
experiences as an anxiously attached
individual i love when we share tips and
tools with each other so as always i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and i will
see you back here again really soon
[Music]
you