hey guys I'm Heidi prabe welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today we are talking
about how to let go of or move on from
past relationships and before we get too
deep into this topic I first want to
spend some time unpacking what it means
when we say that we can't move on or
what it means to be kind of stuck in our
feelings about something that is already
over so to kind of lay the groundwork
for some of the language I'm going to
use for the rest of this video I want to
talk about how relationships have a
couple of components one is the actual
literal relationship we have with people
so if you are in a partnership with
someone you have the time you spend
together the things you do together the
conversations you have with each other
but then also there is the relationship
that you have with yourself around that
relationship and a big part of that
includes the stories we tell ourselves
about what it means about us to be in a
particular relationship and I think that
a lot of the time when we find ourselves
struggling to let go of or move on from
relationships what we're actually
getting stuck on is the story or
whatever other kind of meaning we're
making out of the relationship itself so
on this channel we talk a lot about
attachment and how our attachment Styles
and strategies impact our relationships
and when it comes to moving on from
relationships I think that there is a
very Salient difference between the way
that secure people process things ending
and the way that insecurely attached
people process things ending and there's
a very specific reason why that is when
you are securely attached the
co-regulating that you do inside of a
relationship tends to be very honest
very authentic and so you are making a
true genuine connection with the other
person you are sharing both your true
vulnerabilities and your true strengths
you're exhibiting your Independence and
you are showing where your boundaries
lie and all of those things together
give a relationship the opportunity to
be truly intimate and for two people to
experience really deep connection
so when a secure relationship ends or
when a connection that has those secure
elements to it ends there tends to be a
lot of pain but it's kind of a very
clean direct pain because the things
that you're missing about the
relationship are actually the things
that you're missing you're really
missing going to that other person and
telling them about your day or about
what's been on your mind and hearing
their feedback or you're missing certain
activities that you do together or
certain routines you may have developed
together but with time that clean pain
starts to lessen because you eventually
find new people new situations that you
can co-regulate with as your authentic
self and so the pain of missing this
particular person subsides in a more or
less steady and predictable way over
time why is it different in insecure
relationships in insecure relationships
because two people are very rarely
showing the whole of themselves to each
other so those who lean a little bit
more avoidant are going to really
struggle to get in touch with their more
vulnerable side and share that and those
who lean more anxious are going to
struggle to get in touch with their
independence and so it gets really hard
for True intimacy to actually develop in
these relationships at least on a
consistent basis and when we don't have
true Intimacy in our relationships what
we tend to do is we start to
self-regulate with stories about the
relationship or about the other person
instead of getting that direct human to
human connection so if I'm in a
partnership where I don't really have
deep true intimacy with my partner what
I might do to kind of fill in the void
in that relationship is tell myself a
story in my own mind about what I'm
imagining my partner to be thinking or
feeling and what I think that means
about me if this person thinks and feels
in this way and they love me and they
think I'm amazing what does that mean
about me and we can tell ourselves these
stories about our partnership ships that
are not necessarily evidenced by true
intimacy or connection which also
doesn't mean that something that neither
person wants often it's just something
that if you have an insecure attachment
style you really struggle to access
within yourself and anything you
struggle to access within yourself you
struggle to bring into a relationship I
make that point just to be clear that
it's often not malicious intent that
keeps insecurely attached Couples from
having that sense of intimacy and
authenticity with each other it is truly
just a product of early wounding but
when you don't have that you learn to
regulate using these stories and you
learn to make specific meanings out of
ambiguous situations that allow you to
keep yourself feeling okay now when an
insecurely attached relationship ends
what you often don't have is that very
clean direct pain that you have when a
secure connection ends because your
connection to that person and their
connection to you if you were both
insecurely attached is like likely
muddled by all of these stories you were
both telling yourselves positive or
negative about each other and about what
your connection means as well as the way
that you like to think of yourself
Through The Eyes of the other and it is
always always always always always
harder to get over stories or meanings
that we make up about things in our mind
than it is to get over realities why
because when it comes to the truth and
when I say the truth I mean what
actually happened and what responses we
had in our body about what happened
there is only ever one truth but there
are millions truly endless endless
stories that we could make up to distort
the truth in order to give ourselves
that kind of hit in lieu of true genuine
connection and for those of us who got
really used to at a very young age
regulating through Stories We Tell
ourselves we can have a tendency to get
really caught up on those stories even
when the relationship itself has ended
so in order to let go of and finally
move on from a relationship that has
ended in reality we have to be willing
to let go of the stories we were telling
ourselves about the relationship and
actually face the truth sounds easy
probably easy if you're securely
attached not so easy if you are
insecurely attached and you really
struggle to understand what the truth
versus a story or a fantasy is so let's
go over that briefly what is the truth
the truth is what concretely happened in
reality so something that a camera could
have picked up on happening you and your
ex-partner for a period of however many
years live together cooked meals
together had conversations together had
regular sex spent time with each other's
family spend time with each other's
friends had conversations in which one
or both people may have raised their
voices cried displayed strong emotions
all of these things concretely happened
and in each case when those things
happened something happened in your body
as a response to them the thing that
happened in your body as a response to
those things while they were happening
is your emotion or your feelings about
everything that happened now when we
dissociate from our present moment
emotions and instead go into our minds
and start telling ourselves stories
about what's happening even in the
moment that it's happening what we are
doing is keeping ourselves dissociated
from our real often more vulnerable
feelings and once the relationship has
ended that story might turn into a very
bitter one my ex was a narcissist my ex
was manipulative my ex had all of these
negative characteristics and you can
spend a lot of time ruminating on all of
those and what is that rumination doing
it is keeping you away from the actual
felt experience of pain over things
ending
or you might err on the other side of
this right you might tell yourself angry
stories you might tell yourself
self-deprecating stories I was the
problem I did everything wrong if I can
just take complete and full
responsibility and beg them to come back
maybe then I will fix things and again
what is that story doing it is keeping
you distracted from the actual pain that
you are feeling in the present moment
same with stories that are derogatory
towards the other person oh they were so
pathetic they could never have handled
me I was always too good for them what
is that story doing
keeping you away from the pain our minds
particularly when we are insecurely
attached love to make a whole bunch of
meaning out of things in order to keep
us feeling invulnerable as long as we
are telling a story that is about the
other person and not about ourselves and
how we feel we are approaching things
from a place of invulnerability if we
are leaving our own feelings out of this
story about all the things that the
other person did wrong or about all of
these fantasies that we have about
wanting to get them back if in no
version of those stories are we
acknowledging the way that we just feel
about things ending or the way that we
feel about what happened at different
points within the relationship we are
coming at it from a place of
invulnerability and nothing heals from a
place of invulnerability okay we heal
when we sit with our inner children we
listen to their hurt feelings we listen
to their anger we listen to their
sadness we listen to their pain and we
give them Comfort around those emotions
so what I see a lot of people doing when
a relationship ends and they start
wading through those millions of
available stories about what if I had
tried this what if they had done this
whose fault was it why did this end one
day maybe you're feeling rejected and
really vulnerable and so your mind
starts concocting a story about how
everything was actually your fault and
if you can just change then everything
is going to get better and you're never
going to have to feel like this ever
again right the next day you might be
feeling self-righteous and so that day
you decide this all happened because my
partner is the one who is unhealed who
did everything wrong I don't need to
change I just need to learn to pick
better people and that's the only lesson
I need to take away from this and you
can flip-flop through hundreds of
thousands of different stories with
different themes and none of them will
ever help you move on because the wound
that happened in the meantime is
emotionally festering inside of you so I
want you to think of this as though it
is a literal wound if someone comes up
to you one day and stabs you the first
order of business is not figuring out
who stabbed you and why and where
they're going now and whether or not
they're going to stab the next person
your first order of business is tending
to the wound so that it does not get
worse you cannot fix a situation or
figure out how to solve a complex
problem while you are bleeding out if
you leave that wound unattended to it
will become infected and it will get
much worse inside of your entire system
and the same is true when we leave
emotional wounds unattended while we are
out here trying to Wade through all
these stories analyze the relationship
and what happened and how it ended
through ten thousand different
contradictory lenses that wound that
pain that we feel is getting worse and
worse because we are not giving it the
attention that it needs is there a
benefit to figuring out eventually some
of the things that went wrong and why
absolutely of course however figuring
that out still is not going to make the
wound unhappen if you have been hurt in
a relationship even if the other person
meant well even if it turns out it was
all a big misunderstanding it still
hurts you can't make the hurt unhappen
you can bandage it up well and figure
out how to avoid similar situations in
the future that is the protective
self-parenting piece that we all need to
do but first you need to do emotional
First Aid on yourself nothing is going
to change until that happens so what
does emotional first aid look like it
looks like getting really honest with
yourself and admitting what you feel in
response to what happened so I had a
relationship at one point in my life
where there was a betrayal that happened
there's a specific instance in which my
partner crossed a boundary that we had
explicitly agreed upon in our
relationship and for years both while I
was still with this person and after we
broke up I told myself constant non-stop
stories about my partner I told myself
hundreds of angry stories about what
that person needed to change I told
myself self-righteous stories about how
I was such a perfect partner and they
didn't deserve me I told myself
self-defeating stories about how it was
my flaws and deficits that led to this
betrayal of trust and if only I could
find a way to fix those and make sure
that I'm not that kind of partner again
in the future this will never happen
again and I never found a way to
actually move on and get over that
relationship until I admitted to myself
about half a decade later that betrayal
hurt
just hurt doesn't matter if it was
justified doesn't matter if I understand
it it hurt there is a child inside of me
who didn't know that someone who loved
you could betray you or could cross a
boundary in a significant way and when I
learned that it was really painful and
through actually sitting with that pain
and bringing it into my body and letting
myself feel it and be depressed about it
for a little while and move through it
slowly I was finally able to move on
from that relationship for the first
time because I wasn't preoccupying
myself with all of these stories about
it I was just admitting that something
happened and it hurt and then I had the
true information that I needed the pain
told me something bad happened my brain
told me I understand what led up to that
bad thing happening and so in the future
I can work to make sure that my Dynamics
do not get to that place where it
becomes very easy for betrayal to take
place but until I could really feel and
integrate that pain there was nothing I
could learn from it right all I could do
was continuously emotionally respond to
these stories that I was telling myself
so step one in this process is getting
really Associated to what exactly
happened what is the thing that
concretely happened that a video camera
could have picked up on that is
completely unambiguous and how did you
feel about that thing what happened in
you as a direct response to that thing
so a video camera cannot pick up on
someone being a sociopath a video camera
cannot pick up on someone manipulating
or disrespecting you a video camera can
only pick up on specific things that
were done or said what happened that was
done or said in your relationship that
was painful or that you're stuck on and
struggling to move on from and how
exactly did you feel about it the second
step in this process and it's only
really a two or three step process is
one that's not going to be the right
choice for everybody and it's not going
to be the right choice for every dynamic
or situation so use your own judgment
here be protective of yourself and your
own emotions
but if you can I think that one of the
best things you can do to move on from
someone is to tell them the truth about
what happened so a lot of the time what
we're doing when we're trying to resolve
relationship conflicts is not expressing
what happened and how we felt it is
trying to get the other person to agree
to the story that we have started
telling ourselves about them and their
intentions I will save you the Ted Talk
and just tell you that does not end well
about
99.999999 of the time what does tend to
be a lot more productive is being direct
with people about what happened and how
we felt and then the response you get in
return to the truth gives you some of
the most important information you could
ever have about how to treat that
relationship going forward so there are
two times in my life that come to mind
where I've gone back to a past
relationship of some nature that I was
struggling with not having closure
around not being able to move on from
and told the other other person in very
direct I statements how I felt about
certain things that had happened and in
particular how I had felt about the ways
that those relationships ended and the
responses I got could not have been more
different one of the responses I
experienced a lot of hurt and a sense of
rejection in relation to and the other
response opened up this door for a very
beautiful honest healthy relationship of
a new form to start getting built
between me and the person I'd spoken to
but both of those cases were equally
effective in allowing me to move on from
the past because when we tell someone
the truth and the response that we get
in return we find very hurtful now I can
stop asking myself the question what if
I had dropped all the stories and told
the truth and been completely honest
with this person what would have
happened I never have to ask myself that
question ever again I know what would
have happened I know I don't like what
happens and so now I can move on I don't
have to tell myself all these stories
anymore I did did the true thing I put
my true self on the line and getting
rejected for being your true self is
kind of a great thing it hurts it sucks
you have to find a way to tend to those
wounds you're connecting with other
people who love you and through showing
yourself lots of care and love but it
forever murders every single what if
question that you could ever have in
your mind and once you have murdered
those what ifs it becomes really easy to
move on or things could go in the other
direction right you could for the first
time show up and be vulnerable and open
and honest about how you're feeling and
that could be the thing that changes
your relationship with someone for the
better maybe you find out okay we were
never gonna be the right partners for
each other but we could be the right
friends for each other we could drop all
of these dramatic stories we were
telling ourselves about each other and
just accept that we weren't very
compatible and find a way to build a new
type of relationship on top of that
solid foundation of Truth now that you
have it or maybe you could go back into
the same Dynamic that you had but with a
better more honest and vulnerable
component to it so step one locate the
pain attend to it in yourself and two if
you are able to and if it is reasonably
emotionally safe for you to do so tell
that truth to the other person and see
what happens expose your honest
authentic self to oxygen and just see
what happens it is the most direct way
to get the answers you need and move on
with your life and I want to point out
here that that might not be the most
desirable outcome for those of us who
are not actually interested in moving on
and I say that without judgment
sometimes the stories that we tell
ourselves about other people being the
villain or about us being a villain
these stories are adaptive because we
aren't yet ready to face the truth and
so as much as I would advise us all to
refrain from projecting those stories
outward and trying to enroll other
people in them I do think it's worth
noting that sometimes when we think
about just telling the truth both
accepting what happened and where it
hurt and then moving on that actually
feels kind of panicky for our systems
because maybe the stories we're telling
ourselves are keeping us feeling tied to
that other person and maybe we feel more
comfortable feeling tied to that other
person even in a negative way than we do
in accepting that actually we just had
some incompatibilities and needed to
move on with our lives separately
sometimes the reason why we create all
these stories is because we are just too
afraid to look at the truth and so if
that's the place you're in that's just
something to note the first step in
becoming more honest is just being
honest with yourself about which stories
you are clinging to and why right that's
still a small step in the direction of
Truth and integrity is acknowledging to
yourself when you're not ready to let go
of or to reality test the stories that
you have inside of your own mind and
then I guess the third step in this
process is just building a new future
based on the truth that you now have
access to and if if you can't do step
two and you can't actually get in front
of someone and let them know what you're
thinking or feeling and I understand
that there are sometimes people you
literally can't talk to because they are
dead or because they are incarcerated or
because there is some way in which you
don't have access to them there might be
other people you choose not to talk to
because you recognize that you might not
be emotionally capable of dealing with
certain responses from them if you were
to tell the truth and I do encourage us
all to push ourselves a little bit in
that department but if there are people
who when you have been honest with them
in the past it has consistently led to
conflict that does not get resolved it
might be worth just stopping at step one
going at least I can tell the truth to
myself about this relationship and what
I felt within it and that act of
aligning myself with reality can be
enough for me to move on so that might
look like even if you feel 99 sure that
this person had narcissistic patterning
or something that was really detrimental
to your relationship trajectory still
the most important part is recognizing
how did I feel about that when they said
those things when they spoke to me in a
way that I interpreted as them speaking
down to me or disrespecting me how did I
feel
what blows did my inner child absorb and
how can I be present with that inner
child and help her to heal
instead of staying preoccupied with the
other once I do that work I can actually
start to move on because I've repaired
the relationship that I have with myself
and now that I've felt that pain and
recognized it and absorbed it now what
do I know about which boundaries I need
to have moving forward the next time I
feel this pain
it doesn't matter if I have the right
label or diagnosis for the other person
it doesn't matter what story I'm making
up in my head to explain what they're
doing what matters is I'm familiar with
this sensation of pain I know I don't
want to chronically feel it again so now
I have to learn the next time I feel
this how am I going to respond to
protect my inner child
that might mean communicating honestly
to the other person about your pain and
seeing if they're willing to sit with
you and work through it and if that
doesn't work it might mean setting
boundaries the next time you feel that
type of pain to make sure that you are
protecting your inner child in the
future but again until we name it and
feel it and give ourselves the Comfort
we need around it we are not going to
get better from our pain do the secure
thing
feel the pain acknowledge that you felt
it and acknowledge that it means you
need to do something different all right
that's all I'm going to say on this
topic for today but as always let me
know what's coming up for you guys as
you were listening to this what your
thoughts feelings responses are I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]