hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here so today we are
continuing a series that we started with
my last video how to recognize when
you're in the drama triangle This was
meant to be a three-part series I've
decided to combine the last two videos
into this one so it's now a two-part
series and we are going to cover the
rest of what we have to cover about the
drama triangle today so grab some snacks
hope you're well rested and we will get
into what to me is the most interesting
part of all of this which is how to
disengage from the drama triangle in a
way that allows you to actually get what
you want out of your life so this video
for me is a really
um important personal one I think that I
probably spent a solid 28 years of my
life inside of the drama triangle it was
the way that I learned to communicate
and as I grew up it became the way that
I learned to keep other people close
because it took me a really long time to
realize that there was another way of
doing things that it was possible to
figure out what I actually wanted figure
out which fears vulnerabilities were
driving my behavior without me
recognizing it and then learning to
communicate those things honestly and
directly and learning to form
relationships where that type of
communication is the basis of it right
everyone showing up as they actually are
so what this video is about at its core
is the process of intentionally maturing
when we are in an immature world view
which is what it means to be in the
drama triangle we are operating under
the assumption that the way we feel and
the way that we process information is
kind of intrinsically tied to other
people's behavior so the way that I feel
and the way that I'm going to live my
life is highly dependent upon the way
that other people treat me
stepping outside of the drama triangle
and developing a mature world view means
holding standards for the way that we
will show up in the world and the way
that we will treat other people
regardless of how anybody treats us so
this is about developing integrity and
internal consistency in the place of
reactivity and learning to live like
this means learning to set boundaries
and be very intentional about the types
of situations and people who we choose
to get close to so this is not going to
be the recipe for an easy life where you
don't have to do anything difficult to
get the types of relationships and the
types of situations that you want this
is the recipe for not wasting your life
not the easy path just the worthwhile
one now the first thing I want to point
out about the drama triangle that I
think is really important to understand
is that I believe the number one cause
of being inside of it is not recognizing
when we are inside of it so tip number
one for stepping outside of the drama
triangle and ceasing to waste your time
on pointless drama is learn to recognize
when you are triggered and then develop
a system that you will fall back on when
you are triggered I really like that
quote that um I think people often talk
about this being an army thing that they
tell you you don't rise to the level of
the challenge you fall back to the level
of your training you need to have a
system for what you will do when you are
triggered because when you are triggered
you will not rise to the occasion you
will be functioning in a state that is
not reasoning properly that is not
giving you the accurate information
about the situation you're in and you
will need to have something you can fall
back on that is pre-decided so if you
want to stop living in the drama
triangle the first thing I recommend you
do is start getting really clear on what
it feels like when your trigger
triggered and then what you will do to
make sure that the moment you're
triggered you don't fall directly into
the drama triangle now a situation in
which we're feeling triggered is by far
the easiest way we fall into the drama
triangle because one when we're
triggered we are mixing up the past and
the present so we are reacting to
something that is happening in the
present as though it is the culmination
of all of the emotions that are similar
that we have felt in the past so an
example of this is let's say your
partner cancels a date that you had last
minute and in the moment maybe that's
disappointing right you want it to go on
the date you planned for it it's not
necessarily the most polite thing to do
but let's say you grew up in a family
where frequently plans were made and
then canceled last minute and as a
result of that you learn to internalize
this feeling of nobody really respects
my time like I'm just kind of at the
mercy of whatever everybody else wants
to do and I don't get a say in whether
or not plans move forward
so now as an adult if your partner
cancels a plan last minute it's possible
you're going to be feeling not just the
frustration of that thing that happened
as an adult you might also be feeling
that kind of core wound of nobody
respects me or I don't deserve to be in
the know and so you might now be having
a seven or eight out of ten reaction to
a two or three out of ten situation and
if you're not aware that that's
happening for you it's likely that
you're going to enter into a bad faith
argument like we talked about in the
last video so again a bad faith argument
is an argument where what you are
claiming you are there to resolve is not
actually what you're trying to resolve
you have some hidden need that you're
trying to get met through the argument
without explicitly stating what the need
is the reason it's the easiest to have a
bad faith argument when we're triggered
is because we might not even be
consciously aware of what that need that
we're trying to get met is so we might
actually think this really big reaction
that I'm having to my partner canceling
is truly just about them canceling in
the present moment but then for some
reason maybe it doesn't feel as
resolvable as it should maybe they
apologize take accountability even have
a really good excuse for why they need
to cancel and that still doesn't feel
like enough your body still feels like
it's activated you're angry there's
something you can tell that's still in
there it's very likely that what you're
experiencing is a flashback to all of
those other times you've had similar
things happen and the story that you
began to tell yourself about why those
things happened which brings us to a
very important second point about why
we're most likely to go into the drama
triangle when we're triggered when we
are triggered we are often flashing back
to a time when we are very young so our
emotional systems might be acting as
though we are five six seven years old
maybe even younger than that maybe even
one or two do in stages when we didn't
have language yet and when we are young
like that when we are in a state where
we are dependent upon our parents for
understanding us and for being able to
see and respond to our needs in order
for our survival needs to be met the
stakes feel very high in Conflict
situations we might be forgetting that
we have resources available to us that
we used to not have available to us
because we feel younger than we are in
actuality now this doesn't mean that we
have to never engage with people when
we're triggered it's going to vary
person to person how you want to deal
with being triggered in interpersonal
situations so for myself I have a rule
that as soon as I start to feel really
triggered like if I feel like okay I'm
really activated I'm feeling really
angry or I'm feeling really disgusted
with someone whatever it is I give
myself two options
one I can cease to engage with the
situation I'm engaging with and on the
off chance if it turns out I'm not
triggered and I actually did have the
perfect response to this situation then
I will still have that perfect response
tomorrow right there's no harm in giving
it a day and coming back to it but if I
do choose to proceed when I'm triggered
and do choose to continue interacting
with someone when I'm triggered my role
for myself is I have to overtly let the
other person know
pay I'm feeling really triggered right
now or I'm feeling really defensive
right now and that way I'm now engaging
in a good faith argument right the
person knows they're explicitly made
aware of the fact that I might be
muddling up the past and the present
right now and so they're not engaging
with me as though I'm being completely
rational when I am aware that I am not
now this closing that I'm triggered
means I'm putting myself in a vulnerable
position I'm letting the other person
know I'm a little bit muddled up right
now right so that requires me to think
very carefully about who it's safe to
continue talking to in that state if I
let someone know I'm triggered and that
is a person who is likely to take
advantage of the fact that I'm a little
bit muddled up and confusing past and
present maybe they're going to start
over ascribing present wrongs to pass
things that I'm upset about so going oh
you're just projecting the past onto
this when in reality I am trying to
address the present and that's probably
someone it's not very safe for me to do
this with it's not very safe for me to
talk to when I'm triggered so in this
process we learn when to protect
ourselves so my system is not going to
be everybody's system we all have to
figure out what we need when we're
triggered and how we can maintain a
sense of Integrity in our interactions
when we're triggered or if we can't do
that how we are going to find a way to
disengage and return to the situation
once we are clearer on what's the past
and what's the present and there is
absolutely no shame if you need to do
that every time you're triggered I
actually think that for a long time that
is pretty good practice is just taking a
beat and figuring out okay I need some
time either alone or with trusted
friends loved ones or a mental health
professional who can help me parse apart
what of this emotional reaction I'm
having is related to this situation
versus what is stuff from the past so
that is tip number one for living your
life outside of the drama triangle is
learn to recognize when you're triggered
and then have a system you develop when
you are not triggered for what you will
do when you are this is kind of like a
security system you put in place against
yourself so when your own psychology is
not running the show in the way that you
would normally like it to you have a
system in place to protect you from
yourself to make sure that you're not
going to be actively making things worse
when you go into a triggered State now
tip number two which we already touched
on momentarily there is learn to process
your emotions in a mutually truthful way
with safe emotionally mature people so
what's stepping outside of the drama
triangle is not about is becoming
counter dependent and trying to live in
such a way where you never need anything
from anyone ironically when we feel like
we don't need anything from anyone
that's often a sign that we're inside of
the drama triangle and we are in rescue
mode if you are a human being alive on
this Earth you need close relationships
that is a human need you need people who
can check you people who can let you
know what you're missing in your blind
spots but if you've been living inside
of the drama triangle for the majority
of your life it's likely that the people
you are closest to are your yes men so
when we live inside of the drama
triangle because we grew up inside of it
and that's the way that we know how to
keep relationships going and how to keep
people close we tend to form friendships
with people who have the same preference
because it's almost like we share the
same language having a Social Circle
that is filled only with yes men who
will always tell you you are right the
other person is wrong or who will maybe
try to save your you from your pain in
some way or rescue you from your bad
feelings is one of the most sure-fire
ways to waste your life and stay very
small so the difference between someone
who has an immature or drama
triangle-based worldview and someone who
has a mature or non-drama triangle-based
worldview is that people who have
emotional maturity intuitively
understand that there are two sides to
every story so let's say that you are in
this position where you're trying to
start living your life outside of the
drama triangle and you go up to a family
member who you have never really set
clear boundaries with before and you
kind of lay down the law a little bit
and let them know here's where I am
going to be taking more space or
whatever it is and let's say they get
really upset and really activated and
they go well you don't care about me and
have all of these kind of fiery things
to say if you take that information and
tell it to let's say a friend of yours
who is inside of the drama triangle it's
going to be the same old persecutor
mindset of one person is a hundred
percent wrong and the other is a hundred
percent right but if you take that same
situation to someone who has a more
balanced emotionally mature mindset
they're going to be able to help you see
it from both sides so they can empathize
with the fact that this is really
difficult for you that that is probably
a really painful experience to go
through but also it sounds like the
family member was also in pain it sounds
like maybe they were confused because
you haven't ever set a boundary with
them before so they got very used to
this certain Norm in your relationship
and suddenly you're completely deviating
from it and that's probably a little bit
disregulating for them right maybe the
reaction that they had in that moment is
not the reaction they're gonna have six
weeks from now when they recognize that
you setting this boundary actually
allows the relationship to get better so
in situations that are high stress that
are high strung where we are feeling
like I don't know what's true and what's
false I don't know if I'm a good person
or a bad person it's going to be really
helpful for us to have people close to
us who can provide us with balance
perspectives but to understand those
more nuanced perspectives when we
ourselves are dysregulated and not
seeing things clearly requires us to
have proactively developed a circle for
ourselves of people who we trust to give
us accurate accurate feedback and
developing that type of social network
can take a really long time so this
isn't a short-term goal right but if
it's something that you're really
struggling with in the moment so you
feel like there is nobody you can go to
in your life who's able to provide you
with more balanced perspectives I
recommend looking for a therapist or
some other type of professional who's
able to weigh in on things in a more
regulated and even way the more that
you're able to see both perspectives the
more you're able to naturally start
internalizing that there are two sides
to every story in every situation you go
into and so over time you're likely to
also begin talking about your own
situations in a more balanced way and
the more that you approach situations in
your life in a balanced way the more
you're going to attract people who think
similarly to you and the easier it's
going to become to start building up
that social network of people who are
also emotionally mature it takes time
but to say that it is time well spent is
for perhaps the greatest understatement
I could possibly make this is your life
these are the people who are going to
make up your life and at the end of it
you want to look back and know that you
had actual real connections with people
that were not BS that were not just you
yes mening each other and it's worth
spending your life working towards that
goal if it's something that currently is
not something you have or have ever had
alright tip number three for stepping
outside of the drama triangle is learn
to identify which unmet needs you have a
tendency to project outwards and then
grow up those parts of yourself that
think you cannot meet those needs on
your own as an autonomous adult now for
most of us we don't live our lives
entirely in or entirely out of the drama
triangle for most of us there are
certain areas where we are quite
self-sufficient and where our emotional
age perfectly matches our literal age
and then there are other little pockets
of our psyche where our emotional age is
quite a bit younger than our literal age
and when we tap into those parts of
ourselves we go directly into the drama
triangle even if in most situations in
our life we operate from a more mature
world view so this step is all about
figuring out where those pockets of your
own psyche are and what work you need to
do in those areas to make sure that you
are not defaulting unconsciously to the
drama triangle in those types of
situations now a hack that I like to use
for figuring out where those areas of
our psyche are is thinking about which
emotions tend to come up when we get
triggered I like to think of triggers as
our inner children screaming at us to
get protection for ourselves and if we
are not going to protect ourselves if
our inner children have noticed in this
situation you my parent are consistently
not setting boundaries or taking care of
me I am going to become so emotional
that maybe my emotion will spill out of
you onto someone else and that person
will protect me in the areas that you
are refusing to so I used to have a
tendency particularly in romantic
relationships to get really triggered
and angry when I perceived my partner to
be doing something that I thought was
morally wrong persecutor was a stance
that I was unnatural at so as soon as I
would get triggered my go-to response
was to explain to my partner on no
uncertain terms what I thought they were
doing that was morally wrong and then if
they tried to defend or explain their
behavior I would point out also on no
uncertain terms why their logic was
flawed and their explanation was not
good enough now when I was a kid my best
shot at getting fair and respectful
treatment truly was criticizing the
people who I believed were not treating
me with fairness or respect and pointing
out flaws in their logic and trying to
make a case for myself to get them to
change their behavior but the problem is
that that part of me never fully grew up
for a lot of years I truly believed if
someone was disrespecting me or behaving
in a way that I didn't like I was unable
to set boundaries around that I just had
to try to convince the other person to
stop doing that so in my own healing
journey I had to learn and get really
clear on which things I need to have
boundaries around right my inner child
was screaming at me to set them and it
is the job of my adult self to make sure
I am seeking out people to be close to
who have a preference for the same type
of communication that I do if that's
really important to me so I wish that
when I was young someone had just told
me there are different ways of existing
in the world people enjoy different
levels of analyzing moral situations and
you are someone who enjoys doing that a
lot but some people find that really
annoying so if you are trying to project
the type of life you want to have onto
the people around you so that they
mirror it back to you you're going to
end up in a lot of really chaotic and
frankly unfair scenarios it's unfair to
expect that the people around you just
because they're in your life for
whatever reason are going to perfectly
mirror back the qualities that you want
the people in your Social Circle to have
if there are certain qualities that you
really value in other people you have to
go seek people out on the basis of them
having those qualities and choose to be
close to them because of that you can't
try to change the people in your life to
mirror the types of qualities you would
like and I want to be very clear about
this because it's one of the key
mistakes I see people making when let's
say they're approaching attachment
Theory they're going okay I've met this
person who is completely emotionally
unavailable but I really like them and
I'm just going to try to make them be
emotionally available
that is a preference if you have a
strong preference for emotional
availability and you want everyone
you're close to to be emotionally open
and emotionally available that's a
totally okay preference to have I have
the same one when it comes to my inner
circle but it's not your job to change
in emotionally unavailable person into
an emotionally available one it's your
job to figure out that that is a value
you have and seek out social connections
with people who share that value which
actually is starting to infringe heavily
on point number four for how to live
your life outside of the drama triangle
which is figure out your relationship
preferences and norms and respect other
people's right to have different
preferences and different Norms even if
those preferences and Norms seem
unhealthy or stupid to you this is about
living in the opposite of the persecutor
mindset right in the persecutor mindset
you are imagining that everything that
happened is either right or wrong
everything that other people and
yourself do are either right or wrong
and if you can just figure out who's
right and who's wrong then you can get
the other person to change and give you
what you want so when I first discovered
the drama triangle I learned this like
really fun kind of advanced drama
triangle trick which is I learned to
start pointing the finger at other
people and going you're in the drama
triangle and of course the natural and
very ironic other half of that sentence
which I was not saying aloud was and I
will not be okay until you step out of
it so I was in my persecution of other
people being in the drama triangle in
the victim position myself so this step
is about learning to step outside of
that and learn that there are no rules
about how people need to behave outside
of whatever rules make up the legal
system in the nation that you live in
and this can be a really hard thing to
accept but the sooner we internalize
this the easier Our Lives get
people have the right to be in the drama
triangle there is no law that says they
cannot be inside of it and that they
cannot spend their entire lives pointing
the finger at everybody else and
refusing to look at their own
contribution people have every right to
do that if that's what they want to do
but if you've decided that you're only
going to be okay if everybody else steps
outside of the drama triangle and starts
behaving the way that you want them to
behave you are now in the drama triangle
so I cannot drive the following points
home hard enough
dramatic people have the right to be
dramatic unless they're breaking the law
they legally are allowed to be as
dramatic as they want narcissistic
people have the right to be narcissistic
unless they are breaking the law there
is absolutely no punishment out there
formally for just being a very
self-aggrandizing person
Shady self-fictimizing people who are
going to take every situation and spin
it so that they are the victim and you
are the big bad guy have the right to do
that they have the right to lie to you
to exaggerate things to cheat on you to
take no accountability for anything that
they do and still call it all your fault
at the end of the day people have the
right to behave terribly now does that
mean we have to agree with their
behavior no if it were up to me I would
be running the world very differently
but the world is not up to me which
means the way the world works is that
there are a lot of things out there that
I don't like that people are nonetheless
perfectly legally allowed to do and the
only real choice I get in the matter is
which standards I will have for the type
of behavior that I allow myself to
engage with that's the only choice I get
so if someone is being manipulative if
they are being narcissistic if they are
being dishonest or Shady or they are
emotionally harming me in some way the
choice I get is do I want to continue to
engage with this person or not and
getting good at this requires us
spending time with ourselves like we
talked about in the last step and
figuring out what's really important to
us in relationships so an example of
this is I personally hate passive
aggressiveness like it is one of the
number one things that drives me
absolutely crazy in human behavior so
rather than trying to force the people
around me to never be passive aggressive
I just let people know at the beginning
of me starting to get close to them
whether it's a new friendship whether
it's a budding romantic relationship hey
I don't deal with passive aggressiveness
I do not like it I hate having to deal
with things in kind of indirect ways so
here's how I operate I will always take
you at face value if you tell me you are
fine and we are good and there is no
problem between us I will approach our
relationship as though you are fine and
we are good and there is no problem
between us until you tell me otherwise
but if you do have a problem with me if
there's some something that I'm saying
or doing that's upsetting you I promise
you that if you come to me and you tell
me directly what that is I will sit with
you and I will stay present in that
interaction with you until we figure out
a solution to it I will take your
feelings seriously I will not dismiss
you I will stay with you if you are
honest and direct with me until we work
that problem out because I just have a
preference for non-passive aggressive
communication now passive aggressiveness
is not inherently bad right somewhere
out there there is a couple or a friend
group comprised solely of people who
love indirect communication and who
actually strongly prefer to deal with
things without talking about them
directly and there's nothing wrong with
that like if it works it works right
it's just about figuring out what we
like and what we do and don't want to
put up with and then finding people who
share similar preferences to us so maybe
the worst thing that you can possibly
imagine is your partner sleeping with
someone else and you might think like
yeah that's a pretty Universal
preference I don't necessarily have to
communicate or enforce a boundary around
that but somewhere out there at this
exact moment in time there is someone
who has been scouring the internet and
has just learned the word compersion and
is currently trying to convince their
partner that they should go have sex
with someone else that person or that
couple might just share a preference for
non-monogamy but you have a preference
for monogamy so your role becomes making
sure that when you're dating someone
they have that same preference as you
and they're willing to agree to it and
if that preference is really important
to you and you make an agreement based
on it and the other person breaks the
agreement that it might be time for you
to respect your own boundary and get out
of that relationship even if someone
else would stick around right this
requires knowing yourself and listening
to yourself when you feel like something
is really important to you and then
making that need explicit so that you
are not trying to implicitly get it met
within the drama triangle by guilting
shaming or blaming someone else into
behaving the way that you want them to
behave so this step is all about
uncovering what it is that we actually
want deep down what is actually really
important to us in our relationships and
can we make those needs explicit from
the get-go even if we think we're asking
for something that isn't necessarily
Fair it doesn't matter if your other
option is trying to manipulate that
person into doing something that you
think in the back of your head is kind
of unfair it's a lot better to ask them
outright get them to say yes or no to it
and if they say what the hell definitely
not then maybe it's your job to take a
look at the type of expectations that
you are setting out in your relationship
and ask yourself do I maybe have some
unrealistic expectations if so why which
needs am I not meeting for myself that
I'm now putting on other people and how
can I change my life in such a way that
I no longer need to be Outsourcing those
needs so again this is not the formula
for an easy life right this is the
formula for not wasting your life on
things like refusing to identify and
make clear what it is that you actually
want out of it and it's worth pointing
out here that there are some people who
have a preference for being in the drama
triangle right and they are going to
spend their whole lives there and if you
don't want to be stuck in the drama
triangle yourself you have to let those
people do that even if you love them
figure out how to set your own
boundaries in such a way that you do not
get stuck in the drama triangle with
them and then do not waste your life
even if someone you really love and
would really like to have as a close
companion in life is hell bent on
wasting theirs you don't have to make
that same decision there are a lot of
ways to love and support people from a
distance without getting dragged into
their mess right and living outside of
the drama triangle is going to require
you to figure out what those ways are
now today final tip for not wasting your
life inside of the drama triangle is
learn to identify which interpersonal
battles you are willing to lose in order
to win the long-term war of your own
self-respect so there's a quote of
always loved by Sherry argov that goes
truly powerful people don't explain why
they want respect they simply don't
engage with anybody who doesn't give it
to them and I think that for me this
kind of encapsulates what it is to step
outside of the drama triangle when we
are in the drama triangle we are
spending so much of our time desperately
trying to figure out how we can bargain
or manipulate our way into being
respected by other people and in that
process we are losing our own
self-respect in life people are going to
invite you into the drama triangle it is
going to happen people you love and want
to be close to are going to invite you
into the drama triangle it is going to
happen in a best case scenario you can
find healthier ways of relating to those
people you can be explicit with them
about wanting to find new ways to work
through issues and about creating safe
environments where you both feel like
you can process things in a more direct
way or if that doesn't work you're going
to have to learn which battles you're
willing to lose and let go of which
relationships you're maybe willing to
let go of in order to keep yourself on
your own team people are going to put
words in your mouth and accuse you of
things that are inaccurate when they are
in persecution mode people are going to
act like they will not be okay if you
don't rescue them when they are in
victim mode people are going to try to
create a dynamic where you are dependent
on their help when they are in rescuer
mode and in a lot of those cases it's
going to feel difficult to say no and
walk away from those invitations into
the drama triangle you might tell
yourself I'm going to stick around and
argue with this person who's accusing me
of something just long enough to clear
my name and properly explain what
happened or I'm going to help this
person who's struggling just this one
more time just this last time so they
can finally get on their own feet or I'm
going to take just this one last free
handout from this person because right
now I could really use it and in each
case that's how it restarts right that's
how you go right back into the middle of
the drama triangle and start going
around in circles so in each of those
cases what we have to remember is that
there is an opportunity cost to being in
the drama triangle what we're losing
when we're in the drama triangle is not
just time money energy though it's
probably also all of those things it's
our own self-respect every time we
decide that we need to go engage with
someone who is offering us a bad faith
argument because we believe I will not
be okay if I don't get them to see
things my way or if I don't offer them
the help that makes them think of me as
a good person or if I don't take the
help that allows them to feel connected
to me because they are supporting me we
are telling ourselves the way someone
else feels about me is more important
than how I feel about me
staying connected to this person in an
unhealthy way is more important than my
own connection to myself and the
standards that I want to hold myself to
over time living in that way erodes the
relationship that we have with ourselves
so again this is not about becoming an
island and never engaging with any sort
of conflict there are healthy ways to
move through conflict so ask yourself
every time you find a conflict situation
coming up is this something that I can
navigate with this person in a healthy
way if I express my genuine feelings
openly and authentically if I put my
real deep needs and preferences on the
table and I'm open to collaborating on a
solution based on this person doing the
exact same in return is it likely to
make the situation better is it likely
that we're gonna get somewhere if we
approach this honestly and directly and
if so that is a wonderful conflict to
enter into because it means you're going
to be learning not just about someone
else's perspective but probably also a
lot about your own and you're going to
be able to walk away from that situation
feeling proud of yourself and closer to
the other person
but if the only option you have because
of the way that the other person is
willing to engage with you is to be
dishonest or manipulative in your
approach it's probably worth losing some
battles with that person to figure out
which boundaries you need to draw around
your relationship with them that allow
you to maintain your own sense of
self-respect any situation where honest
vulnerable direct communication makes
things worse rather than better is
probably a battle it's worth losing if
someone is in persecutor mode and they
are really committed to persecutor mode
they want to twist everything you say
they want you to take a hundred percent
responsibility while they take none it
is probably worth just letting that
person bad mouth you and not engaging
with the situation they will get bored
and they will move on if you do not
engage with them for long enough let the
Liars lie about you and if you need
emotional comfort effort around what's
happening turn to those other
emotionally mature people in your
network who will be able to reflect back
to you your true nature right which is
neither a hundred percent good nor 100
bad if someone is chronically in a
victimized position and they really need
help it's probable that you continuing
to rescue them from their own situation
is actually just enabling them to never
develop the skills they need to get
better let those people learn to get
back up on their own and in the meantime
find a way to caretake your own emotions
around what it feels like for you to
watch them struggle this doesn't mean
cut off everybody who's in a bad way it
just means do not go into the drama
triangle by enabling people in
situations where if you were not
enabling them they would have to learn
to help themselves and when it comes to
people who are playing rescuer and who
are offering you handouts with no
strings attached but in the past they're
all always been kind of secret subtle
Insidious strings that have come up
later on maybe in ways that they want
you to treat them emotionally let those
people go find other people to attach
their strings to set boundaries and move
on with your own life let those battles
be lost so that you can maintain a solid
relationship with yourself because it is
only once you have that solid trusting
self-respectful relationship with
yourself that it's going to start
getting easier and easier to find
healthy people who also respect
themselves to have healthy relationships
with we cannot step out of the drama
triangle if we are determined to win
every battle someone invites us into
that takes place inside of it have a
rule for yourself that you will only
deal with problems outside of the drama
triangle and start to approach your life
that way you will start getting invited
to less and less Petty battles as time
goes on so if there is anything that
stepping outside of the drama triangle
reminds me of it is the quote play
stupid games Win stupid prizes when
you're in the drama triangle even if you
are able to kind of win the drama
triangle in every iteration of a fight
so you always end up in that victim
position where the other person feels
responsible for meeting your needs you
are winning a stupid prize you are just
winning a codependent Dynamic that will
get flipped on its head very quickly you
will then be the bad guy to the other
person and you are signing yourself back
up for years of endless drama well the
better life that you could have had
flies out the window
don't do that to yourself do not waste
the time the energy the resource that
you have on this Earth on pointless
drama that goes nowhere there is another
way to live there is a way to live that
will allow you to reach the end of your
life and look back on it and go thank
God I chose to live the way I did thank
God I learned to play the right games
with my life I became the person I
wanted to become I formed the types of
relationships I actually wanted to have
and I got out of my life what I set out
to get out of it I played really big
meaningful games with my life and I won
things that actually mattered to me in a
real way it's not going to be easy but
it's not going to be a life that you
waste okay I think that's all I have to
say for today on the topic but as always
I'm curious about what thoughts feelings
perspectives are coming up for you guys
as you watch this video where are you in
this process and I want to remind all of
us that there's no shame in wherever we
are if you are here and you are trying
to make your life better for yourself I
am so proud of you that is all that we
can ever do right is work as hard as we
can with the tools we have at our
disposal so as always I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and your inner children
and I will see you back here again super
soon
foreign