hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome to my
Channel or welcome back if you are not
new here on this channel a lot of what
we talk about is different models that
help us understand ourselves and other
people as well as how we can use those
models to bridge the gaps more easily
between ourselves and other people or to
just overall kind of lessen our own
dysfunction and today and for the next
two days the model that we're going to
be talking about is my personal favorite
model if I had to select one model and
throw all of the other ones in the
garbage that would help me navigate my
life more effectively I would pick the
drama triangle every single time but
part of the problem with the drama
triangle and we're going to go more into
what it is and what it looks like is
recognizing when we are in it in my
opinion this is the absolute hardest
part of working with this model is how
easy it is to convince ourselves that we
are operating from a place of pure
reason when in fact we are right in the
middle of the drama triangle so today's
video is all about how to recognize when
we are in the drama triangle now if you
have no idea what the term drama
triangle means I do have a couple of
other videos that go into it in more
depth I also am going to recommend the
book how to break free of the drama
triangle and victim Consciousness
librarian Janae weinhold it is a really
quick but really powerful impactful book
that really gives you the layout of how
the drama triangle operates and what it
looks like to be in it as well as how we
can move a little bit away from that
method of thinking but in this video we
are not going to go too deep into the
mechanics of what it is this is about
how to recognize when our blind spots
are leading us into a kind of immature
powerless world view without us
realizing it so what the drama triangle
is as a quick overview is a model of
human conflict that was invented by
Stephen Cartman and it talks about the
three roles that people tend to take on
when they're in a conflict situation
that they're handling kind of
unconsciously and those three rules are
called victim persecutor and rescuer
when we're in victim mode we're
essentially trying to get the other
person to fix the way that we're feeling
for us or to fix our problem for us when
we're in persecutor mode we're trying to
get the other person to realize that
they are wrong and we are right and when
we are in rescuer mode we're trying to
put all of our own needs temporarily
aside in order to fix the way that
somebody else is feeling and essentially
all of these three positions are
victimized positions because each
position operates under the assumption I
will not be okay until this other person
fixes the way that either they're
feeling or the way that I'm feeling for
me so it's this kind of enmeshed world
view where our feelings and our
responses to situations are never really
owned by us they are contingent upon on
how other people are behaving and a lot
of us who grew up in enmeshed or
unhealthy family Dynamics have been
operating from the drama triangle for
most of our lives without ever realizing
it and this is a really big reason I
think while you tend to see insecurely
attached people gravitating to each
other because operating out of the drama
triangle is kind of like having a
different language from people who
operate from a secure world view in the
secure world view needs and preferences
and requests and feelings and thoughts
are stated generally pretty explicitly
whereas within the drama triangle there
is this eternal game you're playing of
trying to get your needs met without
explicitly stating what your needs are
so regardless of our attachment
orientations or our personality types or
whatever it is that we use to define
ourselves if you are operating from a
position of trying to get your needs met
through another person without
explicitly stating what that need is you
are operating from the drama triangle
and for many of us we do some
interactions inside of the drama
triangle some interactions outside of
them depending on the stakes involved in
the interaction depending on whether or
not we feel triggered so there are a lot
of different reasons we could choose to
operate within or outside of it but for
most of us we really don't notice which
one it is that we're doing we might just
notice things like I'm not getting the
results that I want in my personal
relationships so again I'm going to link
below the videos that I have that go
into the Dynamics of the drama triangle
a bit more in depth but essentially what
you need to keep in mind is that when
you're in a conflict with two people who
are operating within the drama triangle
the roles that each are taking on will
continuously shift but the competitive
role is the role of the victim so the
person in the victim position is
essentially trying to convince the other
person you need to change in order for
this problem to resolve and so
everyone's kind of competing to win that
role and to make the other person
believe that they are the reason the
problem is happening but as you'll see
as we go on all of the roles inside the
drama triangle are kind of victim roles
now last thing I want to note about the
nature of the drama triangle is that you
don't have to be in conflict with
another person to be in the drama
triangle a lot of us can create
conflicts inside of our own minds that
put us right in the middle of the drama
triangle so a very common one I see is
people going I won't be happy until
Society changes until the way that other
people show up in the world changes
until politics and the nature of the way
the world is run and govern changes
essentially anytime we're operating from
a very external locus of control we're
usually in the drama triangle and
contrary to popular belief that isn't
because we're just being lazy or like to
be victims it's often because it's the
way that we have learned to stay in
contact with the world and other people
if you didn't learn secure relating
skills early on you might think that the
only way to keep people close to you or
to keep people in your life is to find
these ways of getting your needs met
without telling the truth now why would
you not want to tell the truth often and
if you've been around this channel for a
while you know this it's because our
early defenses keep us away from being
able to tell exactly what the whole
truth is so if you are either anxious or
avoidantly attached you tend to only
have access to about half of the truth
that's important for figuring out a
situation at a given point in time
because especially when it comes to
interpersonal relationships you have a
series of biases that you learn to rely
on starting at a very young age that now
impacts your ability to see
interpersonal situations from a 360
degree view so let's say you air a bit
avoidant and you might have this deeply
internalized view that if I show my need
or my vulnerability or if I even become
aware of the fact that I have
vulnerabilities or strong interpersonal
needs I will be abandoned so the drama
triangle becomes a way that you can keep
other people close without showing them
that you have of needs because you never
need to explicitly State what your needs
are when you're in the drama triangle
and if you have an anxious attachment
style you might have internalized from a
very young age if other people don't see
my vulnerability and how in need of
their help and guidance I am they will
abandon me and I will be left alone so
going into the drama triangle and really
highlighting all of the areas in which
you aren't capable of meeting your own
needs is going to allow you to keep
people close in the way that you're most
comfortable doing that and I want to be
clear that these are not conscious
thought patterns that either of these
styles are having so avoidance generally
do not see themselves as people who are
repressing or refusing to deal with
their emotions if anything they see
themselves as people who are abnormally
capable of handling difficult emotions
and for some reason they just feel a lot
of disgust and self-righteousness in
their dealings with other people and on
the flip side anxiously attach people
don't tend to see themselves as capable
people who are just neglecting their
responsibility to show up for themselves
they see themselves as people who are
truly constantly reacting to being
maltreated by others so what would the
kind of deeper truths be that underlie
these thought patterns so on the
avoidant side of things you generally
have a person who is very threatened by
feeling out of control because the way
they learn to cope early on was to take
control of their environment and their
situations and so if you haven't
avoidant attachment style you may have
spent most of your life unconsciously
surrounding yourself with people and
situations in which you feel a little
bit Superior Ergo consistently in
control of what happens and what you're
neglecting to factor in in a lot of
cases where you end up in the drama
triangle is the fact that it is your
responsibility to seek out people who
you view as your intellectual and
emotional equals and if you are
consistently finding yourself in
relationships with people you don't
respect or who you believe you are
superior to it's likely because that's
the only place you really feel
comfortable but if you want things to
get better and you want to step outside
of the drama triangle and have
relationships with people you do
perceive to be your equals that means
you're going to have to learn to trust
other people's competence and allow
others to take the lead at least half of
the time which requires you to learn a
completely new skill set that might feel
wildly outside of your comfort zone it's
a lot easier to surround yourself with
people who you believe to be inferior to
you and then complain about how all of
your problems are due to their
incompetence or emotional immaturity or
whatever it is now on the anxious side
of things the deeper truth that's kind
of underlying these drama triangle
Dynamics might be that you only really
know how to keep people close by keeping
them involved in some sort of emotional
intensity so if you're gravitating
towards people who don't share your
authentic preferences and wants and
interests that means that you're going
to be in a Perpetual state of conflict
with those people and on some level that
feels kind of relaxing in your nervous
system because as long as you're in
Conflict you tend to feel like okay this
person is not going to forget about me
they're not going to get bored of me and
go away because there's that deep fear
that if you're not keeping someone
really involved in something intense
they're just gonna abandon you because
why else would they want to stick around
now these thoughts tend not to be
conscious whatsoever if they were
conscious they could be quickly tackled
and dealt with and moved on from where
you tend to see the evidence of these
more hidden thought patterns is how your
relationships and your life just
naturally unfolds so really look at how
much of your life are you wasting on
pointless drama how often are you stuck
in interpersonal conflicts that you
can't seem to resolve and how often do
you look back on your life and go oh I
didn't quite do what I wanted to do with
that time versus how easy do you find it
to accomplish the goals that you set it
and also resolve interpersonal conflicts
when they come up and looking at that
ratio of how much do things feel
unsolvable overwhelming and distracting
versus how many things feel calm and
solvable in your relationships is going
to give you a pretty good indication to
start with of how often you're in the
drama triangle and by the way I just
want to make clear that there is no
shame that I'm trying to dull out here
about people who are or are not in the
drama triangle so I spent a solid
probably half of my life deeply steeped
in the drama triangle and the reason I
feel so passionate about these videos is
because I believe that it is a great way
to absolutely waste your life without
having any understanding of why you are
not getting to where you want to get to
in life and why your relationships are
so chaotic I do not think anyone
consciously chooses to be here I think
that our unconscious patterning ends us
up here time and time again and if you
are here watching this video wanting to
get better you are already on such a
wonderful path that is miles away from
just perpetuating this unconsciously so
with that very long intro let's now get
into some of the signs that you're in
the drama triangle and how you can
recognize them so we're going to start
with signs that you might be in the
victim mindset and I think the number
one kind of most obvious and glaring
signposts that were in the victim
mindset in the drama triangle is when we
are feeling extremely anxious about how
someone else is going to behave so
anytime we feel like I won't be okay
unless this other person acts in a
certain way or treats me a certain way
or doesn't do certain things that upset
me that is a very clear sign where in
the victim mindset now this does not
mean that stepping outside of the victim
mindset means behaving like a doormat if
anything it means accepting that our
emotional responses are all our own to
own so if somebody else is behaving in a
way that we don't like that we feel is
unfair this respectful towards us or
unkind towards us it is not our job to
just lie down and go okay I'm going to
take that treatment it is our job to set
boundaries show up for ourselves and go
I will not engage with somebody who
treats me that way right but when we're
in victim mindset we're not looking at
ourselves as people who are capable of
showing up for ourselves and setting
boundaries because we see our happiness
or our self-worth or whatever it is as
tied to our relationship with that other
person so we're kind of handing over all
of our happiness and well-being mentally
to someone else and going okay if you
behave in a certain way that I've
decided I want you to behave then I will
feel okay and generally when we put that
kind of expectation on someone else we
start to feel very anxious about how
they're going to behave because if they
do something wrong then we feel as
though we have no control over our
emotions and now we are going to feel
badly until they start behaving their
differently and we're going to talk in
future videos about how to combat this
type of thinking and start moving into a
more empowered role but for now I just
want us to be logging what these kind of
trigger points might be that indicate to
us that we're in the drama triangle in
the first place another sign you might
be in victim mindset in the drama
triangle is when you're thinking about
how to talk to someone or how to
communicate a problem in a relationship
to the other person and you're getting
really caught up on how to present your
narrative so how to kind of tell a very
compelling story to them that is going
to win them over to your side of things
and help them perfectly understand why
you are in need of them to behave a
certain way or whatever it is so
basically anytime you're trying to spin
a narrative to evoke a certain feeling
or behavior from someone else sharing
our feelings authentically is not that
complicated we say what happened and we
say I felt this about it feelings are
generally pretty simple I feel hurt I
feel sad I feel excited I feel a mix of
things based on X Y or Z thing that
happened right the only way we need to
spin our feelings into a complex
narrative is if we're trying to use our
feelings to manipulate the feelings of
someone else so if I feel hurt by
something it's easy for me to go hey you
said this and I felt hurt but if my goal
is not just communicating my feelings
it's getting you to change your behavior
I now have to think a lot harder about
how I want to communicate what my
feeling is right because I have to think
what feeling am I going to have to evoke
in you in order to get you to realize
you're wrong and change your behavior so
that I feel better and that is a much
more complex situation that you have to
deal with if you are dealing with your
problems from inside of the drama
triangle outside of the drama triangle
we just share what we feel and if the
other person doesn't care we learn to be
okay without the other person and that
is a really scary thing to do when
you're stuck in victim mindset and think
I will only feel okay if this other
person makes me feel okay right but
we'll get to the kind of antidote to
that later on a third sign that you
might be in what I would call kind of a
long-term victim mindset in the drama
triangle so when you are playing the
long game with your unconscious
victimhood is that you continuously feel
as though you are self-sabotaging or
keeping yourself stuck in some kind of
uncomfortable bad situation this could
mean that you are chronically in debt
and for whatever reason even though
logically you know what to do to get out
of it you just can't seem to take the
actions to get yourself out of it you
could be applying the same reasoning to
keeping yourself unhealthy to keeping
yourself in bad relationships any
Perpetual chronic problem that it feels
like you logically know how to get out
of but can't seem to harness the energy
to make yourself get out of might
actually be serving you on some level so
there is a book that I love that I've
talked about before on this channel
called how we change change and 10
reasons why we don't by Ross ellenhorn
and in this book he talks about how a
lot of people struggle to change their
lives for the better because they
believe that the ways in which their
lives are not good serve as what he
calls a testament to their pain so let's
say there is someone from your childhood
maybe your family of origin or maybe a
past partner who you feel wronged you
that you never really felt like you got
Justice around like you feel like okay
something went wrong someone owed me
better treatment and you might be
completely right about that right but if
I move on and I just become happy and
everything goes well for me now it's
like I'm sending the message to that
person nothing you did affected me it's
like you're just letting that person get
off the hook scot-free or at least this
might be what we're Believing on an
unconscious level so there are all of
these ways we might subtly self-sabotage
refuse to get better in life because we
don't want to send a message to whoever
it is that we're still mad at that they
didn't affect us in a significant way
and this is kind of a long-term way to
stay stuck in the drama triangle to go
I'm not going to get better I'm not
going to thrive because I don't want my
mom or my dad or my siblings or that
person who cheated on me and left me for
someone else to know that they can do
bad things without consequences if they
see how much pain I'm in if they see
that I cannot get better cannot get past
this thing cannot Thrive then they have
to reckon with the fact that what they
did to me was wrong
and this is again a long-term version of
the I won't be okay until you change
game and I want to be clear here that
being in a victim mindset doesn't mean
that it's all fake like it doesn't mean
you were never a victim of abuse or
terrible scenarios what a victim mindset
is is the belief that you will not be
okay until the other person the person
who hurt you changes
you can be a victim of truly horrendous
things and still learn to heal without
the help of the person who hurt you you
can find healthy resources you can build
healthy social networks and this is
stuff we're going to talk about in a
video that's coming in a couple of days
is how to do that deep healing work
outside of the drama triangle but it
requires stepping outside of that
mindset that you'll only be okay once
the person who hurt you comes and heals
your wounds so we have to start looking
for both these small scale and
large-scale patterns within our own
behavior all right next we're going to
talk about the persecutor mindset and
which thought patterns or behavior
systems might indicate to us that we are
operating from a persecutor mindset and
before we even get into the signs I want
to point out that the persecutor mindset
probably as per all of the mindsets in
the drama triangle has this inherent
flaw that's based into the premise of
the persecutor mindset and because
there's a a flaw in the premise
everything that flows outward from it
tends to be kind of structurally flawed
so the basis of the persecutor worldview
is the belief that in every interaction
one person is right and the other person
is wrong and you can be the most
intelligent person who can understand
Nuance in about a million different
intellectual scenarios and still be
operating under this very basic world
view that in arguments one person's
right and one person's wrong especially
when you get triggered I have seen
incredibly intelligent people fall prey
to this and I myself fell prey to this
for much of my life and still do
sometimes so don't discount the fact
that your emotional system can believe
something to be true that you
intellectually know is not true and the
reason why this flawed premise of
someone must be right and someone must
be wrong is so troubling for the
persecutor mindset is because it gives
way to this this fear or this underlying
belief that if I am the one who is wrong
I am bad so now it becomes very
difficult to have a complex and nuanced
argument because you're just desperately
trying to prove to yourself that you are
not a bad person and your emotional
system when you're triggered is going to
be willing to distort a lot of
information in order to keep itself
believing that to be true so when I was
in my early 20s my first serious partner
who was a lot more secure than I was at
the time
um gave me this feedback that kind of
floored me and that I still think of
frequently which is that he went Heidi
you often come into arguments I've
noticed thinking that we're here to kind
of fight things out like that one of us
has to win and the other one has to lose
and he was like I see arguments as both
of us sharing our perspectives and then
working together to find a third option
that we didn't know was an option at the
time I could not process the maturity
level that was that conversation and
kind of wonder what that guy's up to now
but that was such a Salient and potent
point right arguments are not inherently
about figuring out right and wrong in
most cases I would even say pretty much
every case where people are being honest
there isn't a right or a wrong there's
just different perspectives and they're
getting missed and between two secure
people the point of a conversation is to
come together and go okay we have needs
that are in Conflict let's talk about
what those needs are and figure out what
each of us is or is not willing to
compromise in order to work towards
Mutual end goals and what's not on the
table at all is a debate about which one
of you is a good person and which one is
a bad person right that's only
unconsciously on the table for those of
us who have deeply insecure attachment
wounding and who think that being wrong
means being a bad person so I think that
the number one sign you are likely stuck
in persecution mode in the drama
triangle is you are noticing that you
tend to have the same type of
dysfunctional relationships or
situations happening over and over again
in your life and you cannot figure out
how to break the cycle and there's a
whole series I have coming up just on
this problem but this might look like
getting into a dysfunctional
relationship getting out of it going
okay I'm going to do things totally
differently next time and then six
months down the line in a relationship
with someone else you're like oh my God
I'm having all of these same problems
again even though I was so intentional
about trying to do things differently
now I think all insecure types are very
prone to ending up in this position I
think that in particular fearful
avoidance can be the most prone to
ending up here because there is that
deep core fear that you are bad and so
you might intentionally pick Partners
who you explicitly think are worse than
you whether that means less principled
or less logical or whatever it is that
at the point in time you're entering
into the relationship you're trying to
really prove to yourself you are not Dot
and then you're using the relationship
to try to prove to yourself if one of us
has to be good one of us has to be bad
and this person is definitely worse than
me then I must be good and I can relax
and again this isn't just fearful
avoidance who do this I just think
they're the most prone to it I think all
insecure types kind of unconsciously do
this and if the other person is not
acting in the either irrational or
unkind way that you're expecting them to
you might unconsciously start to kind of
poke some buttons and see if you can
instigate that response in them so that
once again you feel like okay I'm the
good one they're the bad one and
whatever your definition of bad is is
going to be dependent on your personal
experiences and how you've come to
Define that now here's the inherent flaw
in this reasoning in reality
relationships that work are not
relationships where both people are
following the exact same moral code and
doing everything right in reality
relationships that work are
relationships where both people are able
to Deep acknowledge each other's
preferences and figure out compromises
that they're both willing to make in
order to accommodate those preferences
so there is no right or wrong it's just
hey what do you want and what do I want
and where do those wants overlap versus
where do they not overlap and to what
degree are we willing to stretch and
bend and make concessions in order to
stay in relationship with someone who
doesn't have 100 of the same wants as us
because no two people do but again this
can be really difficult to grasp if
you're insecurely attached so I see a
lot of people on the anxious side of the
spectrum going if my partner were just
more emotionally intelligent or more
emotionally in tune with me or more
emotionally available then our
relationship would work out and on the
avoidant side of things I see a lot of
people going if my partner were just
more self-regulated or more independent
or more rational then our relationship
would work out but in reality the
question that both of these people need
to be asking themselves is am am I
willing to accommodate my partner's
preference for either emotional
unavailability or emotional fixation and
if no it's my responsibility to go I
can't change someone else so if this is
something I really don't want in a
relationship then it's my job to leave
the relationship there are no inherent
right or wrong levels of emotionality or
reasonableness we just all have to make
a decision about how much of each of
those things we want to tolerate or we
want to engage with in a relationship
but again it's really hard to grasp that
there's no sense of right or wrong when
we're insecurely attached so anxious
people tend to have this inherent belief
that I am very pure and vulnerable and
have good intentions at all times and
because of that it means that I could
not possibly have done something wrong
in my relationships because having good
intentions means that you can't do
anything wrong so if someone did
something wrong and there's a problem in
the relationship it must be because
somebody had bad intentions and I don't
have bad intentions so my partner must
have bad intentions and of course there
is a flaw in this logic and the flaw is
that you do not have to have bad
intentions to unintentionally cause
someone else harm pure intentions can
lead to negative impact so just because
you weren't trying to hurt someone
doesn't mean you didn't hurt them and on
the flip side just because you are hurt
doesn't mean someone else had bad
intentions and was deliberately trying
to hurt you most of us have completely
unintentionally hurt other people a lot
of times and that does not make us bad
people in fact part of the secure world
view is realizing that we don't know
everything and we are going to mess up
and it's okay we can be patient and kind
to ourselves and receive feedback about
how we're making other people feel
without panicking because we know that
we can do something wrong and still be a
good person now the flip side of this is
the avoidant world view of I am rational
and and logical and self-contained at
all times and as long as people's
actions are grounded in reason and
principle everything should work out for
the best so if something is not working
out for the best in a relationship it
must be because the other person is
behaving irrationally because I'm not
irrational and irrationality is the
cause of all wrongs now the flaw in this
logic is that if you're not factoring in
the way people feel as a really
important part of making decisions as a
couple you are not being reasonable or
logical you are omitting large swaths of
information that is directly relevant to
the problem that you're trying to solve
which is not at all a logical or
rational thing to do so these are just
examples of how our early biases and
what we believe is true about the world
can lead us to be in a persecutor
mindset where we're failing to
understand that we have more control
over the situation than we think we have
but another sign that you're in the
persecutor minds set is you're feeling
very self-righteous so you're feeling
like I'm 100 right the other person is a
hundred percent wrong I figured out
where everyone's roles here are and I
feel kind of high on that realization
and empowered to go tell the other
person exactly where they're wrong and
I'm right now feeling self-righteous is
a feeling we all love because it's a
relief from that interfere that we are
bad right if we're self-righteous and
we're 100 right and the other person is
a hundred percent wrong it means we must
be good we have figured it out and we
are the good ones but in reality
self-righteousness usually is an
indication that we're missing part of
the story because there are very very
very few I'm gonna say probably no
situations in life in which we are truly
100 in the right when it comes to a
situation that is complex and another
person is 100 truly in the wrong almost
always if not always there are
perspectives that are getting missed
that need to be integrated and feeling
self-righteous is often an indication
that we are missing important
information so unfortunately because
self-righteousness can be so fun we have
to start noticing and logging it as a
sign that we're probably in persecution
mode and need to think a little bit more
and balance our perspective a little bit
more before trying to convince someone
else to change and that's the third sign
that you're in persecutor mode in the
drama triangle is any time you're having
the feeling of I will not be okay until
the other person recognizes that they
are wrong and I am right even if the
other person is wrong and you are right
you do not need them to change in order
for you to be okay and again that's
something we're going to talk about
later on in this series we are in
persecution mode not only when we think
we're right sometimes we are just more
or less right we are in persecution mode
when we think we are right and we will
not be okay until the other person
acknowledges is that that is an
Outsourcing of that locus of control
right and last but not least we're going
to look at what it looks like to be in
The Rescuer mindset this one in my
opinion can be the toughest one to
identify because it is very subtle and
Insidious like it feels less I would say
kind of activating and anxious than the
other two positions and it feels a
little bit kind of smug and
self-righteous and like oh I'm on this
throne and everyone's below me but it is
nonetheless being in the middle of the
drama triangle so the first sign that
you're probably in the rest of your
mindset in the drama triangle is anytime
you're feeling kind of superhumanly
stoic mature reasonable compassionate
and needless when in reality the fear
that is usually governing that mindset
is if I show other people that I have
needs I will be abandoned or left alone
so your needs when you are in The
Rescuer mindset are not truly off the
table you're just trying to find a way
way to sneakily get your needs met
without ever explicitly admitting to
another person that you have them in the
first place so a little while ago I had
an interaction with someone where they
were in my opinion pretty blatantly rude
to me like just not kind I was kind of
perceiving them to be in the victim role
trying to blame me for the way they were
feeling and I had this moment where I
was like you know what I'm going to
Enlighten this person about the drama
triangle I am going to change their life
by helping them understand the way that
they are seeing things wrong and I
almost visualized myself looking at them
as someone who is like in this storm of
anger and dysregulation and I was like
oh I could just come envelop that storm
with like Clarity and light and then
their life is going to get so much
better and then I force myself to do
what I do every time I start thinking
kind of grandiose thoughts about my own
goodness in that way and I went to my
wallet and I took out my ID and I was
like okay what name is on this ID does
it say uh Mother Teresa is that your
legal name no how about Jesus Christ
does the form of identification that was
given to you by the government say Jesus
Christ on it no okay so probably there
is some sort of selfish motivation you
have here that you are just not
recognizing or acknowledging because you
don't like to feel vulnerable and until
you figure out what that secret need or
want that you have in this situation is
you are not allowed to interact with it
you are not allowed to go rescue or save
your people until you can explicitly
tell them I want to help you understand
this model and here is what's in it for
me and if you can't do that it's
probably just time to walk away from
that conversation because what you would
be doing by going into it is assuming
The Rescuer position to their victim or
persecutor and then you would just start
going around in circles probably for a
number of years because often when we
play The Rescuer then later on we start
to get resentful of the fact that this
person is now expecting us to meet their
needs and put our own the side and then
we start trying to get our own needs met
in increasingly manipulative ways and
that is how we end up wasting Decades of
our lives inside of the drama triangle
so we can save ourselves a lot of that
trouble by becoming conscious of when we
are feeling kind of superhumanly good
which absolutely nobody is I don't care
who you are you are not the exception to
this rule even Mother Teresa was
definitely fulfilling her own needs from
doing all of the work that she did
anyway another sign that you're probably
operating from a rescuer mindset is
anytime you feel yourself kind of
consumed with worry or trying to
caretake the needs of someone who has
not explicitly told you that they want
you to be worried about them or that
they need caretaking you can also be in
rescue or position if the person has
made it explicit it's just a really big
red flag if they hadn't and you are
nonetheless preoccupying yourself with
thinking something might be wrong and
someone might need your help with it so
an example of this is I have a good
friend who I actually think I have a
really secure Dynamic with like we do a
lot of emotional processing with each
other and I think we both get a lot out
of that Dynamic but because this friend
is generally just kind of better at
being emotionally open and vulnerable
than I am I noticed that she tends to
express her problems first and then I
will express my stuff after the fact
like I have this story in my head that
once I'm able to hold space and be that
secure base for someone else then I can
take my turn but it has to happen in
that order which is purely an ego-based
thought right so there's one week where
I hadn't seen this friend and we hadn't
really been in touch the way we usually
were because she had a lot going on and
I found myself thinking kind of
obsessively like oh I hope she's okay
like I know she has X Y and Z situation
happening I know that she was a bit
stressed out about this like I should
really just reach out and make sure
she's doing okay that everything's been
going all right for her and then I
realized like the reason I'm feeling
that way and the reason why I'm
inventing problems for her in my head is
because I want to talk about problems I
have but I feel like I'm not allowed to
do that until first she tells me about
her problems so I forced myself to text
this friend and essentially say
everything that I just said to her which
is hey I was noticing like I'm wanting
to reach out I'm making up some stories
about what's going on for you and I
think that the reason I'm doing that is
because I actually want some support and
I want to talk to you about what I'm
going through but I've invented this
scenario where I can only do that after
you tell me a problem that you have and
we work through that first and we just
laughed about that and then went on and
talked about my stuff and then the next
time talked about her stuff and that is
how secure relating works right honesty
and explicit expressions of which needs
we want to have met but I think that a
lot of the time that's this kind of
Insidious thing our brains do we go okay
I don't want to seem like I have needs I
don't want to seem like I'm too needy or
vulnerable or clinging or whatever it is
so I will try to First help someone out
with a problem that either they're
telling me they have or that I have
decided they have and then and only then
and well I feel like I'm allowed to take
from the relationship but in reality
relationships that are secure are all
about give and take and it's totally
fine for either person to initiate it in
fact it's way healthier for both people
to take turns initiating it than it is
for one of them to consistently be doing
it and the other one to be only reacting
to it so the last sign that you are
probably in a rescuer position in the
drama triangle is any time you are just
feeling like you are above having
feelings everybody has feelings
everybody has interpersonal needs and
something we're going to talk a lot
about in a couple of days is the fact
that the antidote to the drama triangle
is not becoming needless it's actually
about learning to be more explicit about
your needs so that other people can
agree to meet them or not or so that you
can figure out where do I actually need
to do some extra work to meet my own
needs so it's not about becoming an
island it's not about becoming counter
dependent when we are feeling counter
dependent and like we don't need
anything from anyone buddy that's
actually usually a sign that we're in
the drama triangle because we have
repressed our interpersonal needs which
everybody has so deeply that we don't
even know we have them but we do have
them and when we have repressed needs
our systems our nervous systems our
entire psychology is oriented around
getting those needs met but if we're
refusing to acknowledge them consciously
we're going to start doing manipulative
stuff to try to get other people to meet
them without us admitting that we have
them and that is exactly what being in
the drama triangle is all about trying
to get our needs met without telling
people what they are alright this has
been a really long video and the next
two are also going to be pretty long
videos so I'm going to leave it there
for today I just wanted to go over some
of the I'm going to say red flags to
watch out for inside of our own minds
that make us think or feel as though we
are behaving perfectly rationally and
maturely or maybe we're just standing up
for ourselves and getting what's ours
when actually what we're doing is going
directly into the drama triangle and
inviting other people to play in the
drama triangle with us and this is
definitely a way we could approach
communication I'm not going to say that
it is the wrong way to do things I'm
just going to say that a lot of the time
it doesn't get us what we want in life
and it ends up wasting a lot of the
mental and emotional energy that we
could be putting towards building
healthy relationships and working
towards our goals in life so it is up to
each of us whether we want to stay in
the drama triangle or whether we want to
step outside of it and if the answer is
that you are interested in learning some
skills for stepping outside of it we're
going to go over what those are later
this week but for now I'm very curious
what about this video did or did not
resonate for you guys what thoughts
emotions feelings ideas are being
spurred as you watch this let me know
all of that in the comments below as
always I love you guys I missed you all
happy to be back on YouTube and I will
see you back here again for the rest of
this series really soon
[Music]