hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel
we're talking about intimacy inside of
insecurely attached relationships so
that means any relationship where at
least one person does not have a secure
attachment style but especially inside
of relationships where both people do
not have secure attachment Styles so
this very often shows up as an anxious
avoidant romantic relationship Dynamic
but everything we're talking about today
can be applied to any relationship where
you're experiencing emotional intimacy
with someone so that could be a
friendship it could be a family
relationship it could be a romantic
partner and it's likely that I will use
the term partnership just to make the
point the most clearly throughout this
video but once again this doesn't have
to be applied to romantic Partnerships
specifically so what we're going to be
talking about today is why intimacy
itself can be highly triggering for
people who are not securely attached and
I think that very very often this is
what ends up breaking relationships
apart when both people get to the point
where intimacy has the potential to
develop so we're going to go over why
intimacy can be so triggering for those
who a either avoidant anxious or fearful
avoidant on the attachment SP Spectrum
what it looks like to have Intimacy in a
secure dynamic as well as what your
options are if you recognize yourself in
the problems that we're going to go over
today so how can you change yourself and
your approach to your relationship in
such a way that allows you to grow
through intimacy rather than break down
and disconnect from the relationship
when you find yourself facing it and
before those of you who areir anxiously
attached go this is not going to apply
to me I love intimacy I always go
directly towards it you might want to
stick around because you may find that
your idea of intimacy does not perfectly
match what intimacy actually looks like
and so we're going to talk about how
this can come into play even in a
situation where an insecurely attached
person develops a relationship with a
securely attached person if you're
unable to acknowledge the distortions
that you're making in the face of
intimacy you're relationship might not
be able to withstand this so the first
reason why those who a insecurely
attached tend to struggle with intimacy
is because intimacy and vulnerability
are not necessarily what we think they
are in its simplest and most pure form
intimacy is nothing but a mirror anytime
we meet someone who is able to deeply
reflect us back to ourselves we are
establishing an intimate connection with
that person however most of us do not
instinctively consider intimacy to be
about that a lot of us unconsciously
believe or maybe consciously based on
things that we have read or heard out
there that intimacy is about sharing the
story we have about ourselves and our
lives with somebody else and in part
that's true so all of us develop
narratives and stories about our lives
that allow us to experience a sense of
continuity in our ideas about Who We Are
that is completely and totally human we
all need to do that there's nothing
wrong with it and in large part intimacy
is of course allowing someone to see the
inside of our world which includes the
way that we see ourselves the stories we
have about ourselves in our own lives
and a lot of us might believe that that
is the whole of what intimacy and
vulnerability is I'm here to argue that
that is only a very small part of
intimacy and vulnerability and in fact a
lot of the time it doesn't even get
vulnerable at all when we're doing that
with someone if we have a life story
that we have constructed in which maybe
bad things happen to us but we see
ourselves as the Eternal hero of that
story which might also mean that we are
the victim of a lot of other people's
behavior in that story we are actually
telling a pretty invulnerable story
because no matter what we're telling
another human being we are in full
control of the narrative even if we are
being very honest and sharing things
that we're not proud of which is
definitely getting us closer to intimacy
we're still only showing the person as
much of ourselves as we are aware of
okay so we do not have the full story on
who we are that is true of every single
human being there are always
discrepancies between the way that we
see ourselves and the way that other
people experience us and in that Gap
that exists between how we see ourselves
or what our ego is based around and how
we actually are in the world that Gap is
where all of our true vulnerabilities
lie to be vulnerable in its literal
definition of the term means to be
susceptible to harm or attack we are
always most vulnerable in the areas that
serve as our blind spots if I think that
I am a wonderful caring person who never
does anything to harm another human
being but I have areas of my life where
I am accidentally or unintentionally
causing harm there's now a gap between
my ego my perception of myself and my
actions or the reality of how I am in
the world and the impact that I have as
a result of how I am in the world so in
that Gap once again lies my
vulnerability it's that which I cannot
accept to be true about myself lest my
ego suffer
substantially now here's the thing in
our non-intimate relationships so in
relationships with people we are not
that close to or who maybe we don't
depend upon for anything significant or
vice versa it's unlikely that those
vulnerabilities are going to be
reflected back to us because if we do
something that just kind of annoys
someone or that feels in congruent to
them
if we're not that deeply in relationship
with them it's unlikely they're going to
risk a conflict by bringing that up to
us but in more intimate relationships
particularly attachment relationships
where people are relying on each other
our blind spots are going to start
creating more problems because the
things that we have not acknowledged
about ourselves
subconsciously come out through our
actions in Intimate
Relationships and then when our partner
or any other Clos loved one reflects
back to us the way that we have made
them feel or the impact that our actions
had on them if that thing is in
congruent with the idea we have about
ourselves we are now going to be in a
lot of trouble and we're going to be
facing a significant dilemma because
they are mirroring something very real
back to us but it does not match our
idea about
ourselves now this leads us to the next
thing I want to point out which is that
insecurely attached people tend to have
a lot more blind spots than those who
are securely attached so by definition
insecure attachment is about the ways in
which we have learned to distort our
ways of seeing ourselves other people
and the world so this idea kind of came
into play initially through John bulby
who was the father of attachment Theory
developing the term defensive exclusion
so when we are very young bulby proposed
that anything we learned or observed to
be true about the world particularly
about our caregivers and our
relationship to them that would be too
psychologically threatening for us to
accept as the truth we learn to in some
way or another push out of our
awareness the problem is that when we
push things out of our awareness
particularly entire patterns of Behaving
or feeling or relating to people we end
up having to distort a lot of other
things inside of our own minds in order
to make that one emission make sense so
in the dynamic maturational model of
attachment which was developed by Dr
Patricia Crittenden she talks about the
various transformations of information
that we make inside of our minds when we
are insecurely attached so things like
omitting
certain patterns of feeling or ways of
thinking from our awareness things like
distorting the role that we or other
people play in situations things like
denying that which we fear might be true
that would disrupt our view of how we
and the world and other people function
so there are various types of
information Transformations that we
learn to make from a very young age when
we grow up insecurely attached and in
the future I will make a video where we
go over all of them and talk about what
they look like but for today all you
need to know is that if you are
insecurely attached by definition you
have a lot more blind spots when it
comes to the difference between your ego
so the way you think of yourself and
other people and the world and the way
that you other people and the world
actually are and the more distorted our
image of oursel is the more upset we're
going to be when we look in a mirror
right if I have this idea of myself as
looking a certain way and then I go into
the mirror and see something else I'm
going to get a little bit upset and
triggered when I look in that mirror
because what I see in that mirror is not
the way that I like to think about
myself and perhaps the way that it is
adaptive for me to think about myself so
if intimacy is like a mirror into our
inner emotional and cognitive world we
are going to become deeply upset when we
look at that mirror and it doesn't match
what we believe needs to be true about
us in order to navigate the world
effectively so very often in insecurely
attached relationships we end up at this
Choice point where we have to pick
between our ego and the way that we need
to think about ourselves in order to
feel okay and the relationship which is
going to be the thing that is mirroring
the truth of how we are back to us and I
want to point out here that it is not
like secure people have no discrepancies
between the way they see themselves and
the way other people see them but
because from a very young age they were
probably having a lot of very open and
accurate conversations with the people
around them where they had clear
mirroring they're going to be more aware
than insecurely attached people of what
it is that they're not great at or that
they're struggling with they're not
going to have these strong ideas about
themselves that are significantly
detached from reality so one such idea
might be something like an avoidantly
attached person believing that the only
thing you need to do to keep a
relationship running smoothly is to make
sure that you're both always on the same
page about what is logical and what is
true and that the whole emotional side
of things the way you make the other
person feel and the way they feel
towards you are not as important and so
you're going to get into these arguments
where you're always trying to argue
about right versus wrong when the real
problem is in your blind spot of how
you're each affecting each other on an
emotional level or in the same vein if
you're anxious you might have this big
blind spot around your own need to
self-regulate and you might have this
idea that relationships are about
someone else making you feel good and
your self-esteem healing when in reality
that's something that a relationship can
never completely fulfill for you so both
of you are going to have these ideas
about the world that you cling to very
tightly because they are the things that
truly worked for you and allowed you to
survive in childhood so those patterns
of survival do not go away overnight
they are incredibly persistent but again
inside of relationships your partner is
not reacting to who you tell them you
are they are reacting to who you
actually are and the way that you are
actually showing up so if you believe
I'm the most loving kind devoted person
and everything I do is for my partner
but the way you're actually showing up
is in a way that is creating stress
tension and burden for your partner
you're not going to be able to resolve
that challenge and that discrepancy
until you find find a way to look at
what is true and where you are each
missing a piece of the other perspective
the same is true if you think that you
have this whole relationship thing
figured out you've read all the books
you've gotten all the practices down and
now if anything is going wrong in the
relationship it must be your partner's
immaturity that is the problem I'm
looking at you avoidance for this
mindset until you recognize that you can
still have blind spots you are not aware
of that your partner can see and you
cannot the Deep conflicts that come up
inside of the relationship are never
going to get
resolved now what this does not mean is
instantly replacing your idea about
yourself with your partners every time
they come to you and have a different
opinion what this means is that you're
willing to stay open to the idea that
you are not the final Authority on who
you are and how you're showing up
other people hold pieces of that puzzle
that you do not have in your own hands
so it's highly likely in almost any
situation of this nature that you have
important pieces of information about
yourself that your partner does not know
it's also likely in almost every
situation like this that your partner
has important pieces of information
about you and the way that you are
behaving subconsciously that you do not
have and the only way to really get to
the bottom of this is for both of you to
be willing to find the truth that's in
the middle or somewhere off in left
field so this is going to require you
being willing to hear them out as they
share their experience of you to you and
take them seriously as well as them
being willing to hear you out when you
explain your experience of yourself to
them and then finding a way to agree
that those two things need to be
integrated before you can get anywhere
significant in resolving the conflict so
you have to figure out how both of those
things could be true and we're going to
get into in the rest of this video what
exactly that looks like so some tools
that you can use to make sure that these
conflicts get resolved in a way that is
not deeply damaging to either one of
your experiences of yourself or each
other other because this does have the
potential to get really messy and really
ugly really fast so essentially anytime
we find ourselves at this moment in a
relationship where we're confronted with
our partner or our intimate other seeing
something about us or vice versa that we
disagree with we're now at a choice
point so let's say someone I'm close
with comes up to me and goes hey you
have not been acting very sensitively
toward WS me you said something the
other day that really hurt my feelings
and I think you could have been very
different in your approach when you came
to me and said that thing you really
could have considered how it made me
feel and my ego is going to go I say
everything perfectly I have studied
communication I've studied attachment
Theory I have all of these skills if
you're offended by what I say it's just
because you need to toughen up and stop
taking things so
seriously now the truth might might be
that I actually have not spent a lot of
time really sitting with and paying
attention to how other people are taking
my feedback when I share it maybe I know
how to do it in a clear and concise way
and maybe I think that I'm being
empathetic but the way that I'm coming
across because of some other aspect of
my demeanor that I'm not aware of
because I can't see myself in the world
is actually very off-putting and hurtful
to the people that I'm close to so in
the moment that I receive feedback like
this feedback where my idea of myself
differs from other people's experience
of me I have a couple of choices one
choice is that I can kick the mirror to
the curb so if someone is reflecting
something back to me that I don't like I
can go well you know what the
relationship with this person is not
that important they obviously can't see
me clearly so I'm going to get rid of
this mirror I'm going to stop talking to
this person take space stop being close
with them temporarily or permanently and
I'm going to deal with the discomfort of
this experience by putting that mirror
that is intimacy out by the curb the
next option and this is probably the
most damaging of all possible options is
I could try to break the mirror and this
is something that often we do very
unconsciously right but it's very very
dangerous so we convince ourselves this
other person is not seeing this thing
clearly and if they're not willing to
accept that they are wrong about what
they're saying I will try to let them
know that I think they are not
perceiving things correctly because if I
can convince myself that the mirror is
broken I don't have to deal with what
it's reflecting back to me that I don't
want to see and this tends to be how we
accidentally get into very abusive
patterns of behavior the more
well-traveled option and this is one
most people default to in most
relationships is we try to wash the
mirror we go hey it seems like there's
just something spotty in the way of you
seeing me clearly let me clarify for you
let me try to Windex this for you let's
get back in reality because I know that
what you're saying isn't true so I'll
just explain to you what is true and
eventually we'll get there the problem
is that if the mirror actually is
reflecting something back to you that is
real you will not be able to wash that
spot off of the mirror because it
doesn't exist this is why a lot of
fights never end up getting resolved
because there actually is something true
the other person is picking up on that
you're missing and there's probably also
something true that you know that they
are missing and so this leaves us one
final option that if you want to heal an
insecurely attached relationship in any
any capacity is going to be important to
turn to time and time and time again
which is being willing to face the
mirror look at what's inside of it that
you don't like and accept that there is
some truth in it and then be willing to
work with that truth to start changing
your perception of yourself so that it
more closely mirrors what is actually
happening in reality and the way that
you are actually showing up in the
world now this could mean that first you
just accept okay I'm behaving in a way
that is insensitive to others
unintentionally and then you could
choose to actually change what's
happening so you don't have to
internalize that as I'm a terrible
person I don't care about people's
feelings right it doesn't have to become
a part of your identity you can
acknowledge the way that I'm acting
doesn't reflect my intentions or what I
want to be true so I can be humble I can
listen to the feedback and I can find a
way to change my Approach so that it
better reflects what I do want to be
true and the really cool thing about
this is that if you're able to do this
well inter personally this process the
intimacy process provides an incredibly
powerful portal for healing for both
people because if you're able to reflect
one another back to each other more
accurately and the better that you get
at this and the better your
communication gets the more accurate
you're going to become in your
reflections of each other this is how we
use relationships as healing tools as
places where we can actually grow and
get better so now we're going to talk
about how to do that so how can an
insecurely attached relationship heal
rather than disintegrate in the face of
intimacy the first thing that absolutely
needs to happen is that you have to
deeply accept the premise that you are
not the final Authority on yourself that
other people see parts of you that you
do not see and and this part is very
important you have to believe that the
person you are in this intimate
relationship with is both intelligent
enough and skilled enough to see you
relatively
clearly now this does not mean that
their own patterning is never going to
get in the way of how they see you in
fact that's likely to happen all of the
time but it means that you at least
trust that this other person is not
ill-intentioned so you have faith that
they are not intentionally trying to
reflect you back to yourself in a way
that is very negative because they need
to do that in order to feel as though
their egoo story stays strong so this
often happens when you have someone
who's ego story is so far from the truth
that they need to reflect people back in
a way that is incredibly incorrect In
order to maintain their idea about who
they are and what the world is like so
in these scenarios if you hold the
belief that your partner or this person
you want to be in Intimate connection
with is truly so distorted in the way
that they see the world that they have
almost nothing to offer you in the realm
of action accurate mirroring
unfortunately that's probably a scenario
where you are never going to achieve
true intimacy with that person for True
intimacy to happen and for True
transformation to take place we need to
be dealing with someone who we believe
sees things clearly enough at least a
high proportion of the time that we can
take them seriously when they come to us
and tell us what their perception is of
us because as soon as we're writing off
what they say entirely we're right back
to that first option of putting the
mirror in the trash and deciding that
there's nothing we can learn from so
there needs to be a certain degree of
mutual trust in order for this process
to really get its feet off the ground
second thing that makes this process
work more smoothly is when both parties
are able to use ownership language in
order to point out the blind spots they
see in each other to each other so owner
ship language is kind of the opposite of
what you would expect when you think
about how to point out someone's blind
spot to them you might think if your
partner is being kind of weird and withh
holdy the clearest way to point out to
them what they are doing is to say hey
you're seeming kind of weird and withh
holdy in your energy what's going on but
the more skilled way to do this because
it by passes a lot of those ego filters
is just to share their impact on you
with them them so instead of going hey I
feel like you're withholding something
going hey I notic that for some reason
I'm having a hard time feeling connected
to you right now and I notice you keep
kind of looking away when we're talking
and I'm feeling like we're not really
able to get in sync here what do you
think about that so this is the art of
sharing your experience with someone in
a way that is impossible for them to
argue with and you have to be sharing
the truth right when we share our
subjective experience with another it
gives them information about how they
are coming across and gives them the
opportunity to notice the discrepancy
inside of their own minds between their
intention and their impact and the
better both people get at doing this and
sharing their perspective using
ownership language the easier it's going
to be for each party to begin naturally
arriving at their own blind spots so I
remember this time when I was in this
kind of unofficial support group where a
couple of my friends were gathered
around to just offer each other care and
support around different issues we were
dealing with and I was talking about one
problem I had that I felt like was too
heavy to put on the group so I was kind
of tiptoeing around it and sharing a
little bit and then backtracking and
going but you know it's okay I've got it
under control it ET Etc and my one
friend finally looked at me and went I
feel really disconnected with you when
you're telling us why it's okay and when
you're telling us why you don't need
help with it and I feel really connected
to you when you just share the raw
emotion with me and I'm feeling
frustrated that you're not doing very
much of that because I want to feel
connected to you and those are the
moments when I feel the most connected
and that moment kind of broke my brain
because because I believe the way to
stay in connection was to contain my
experience as much as humanly possible
and not let other people see that raw
more uncontained part of my experience
and here is this person whose intellect
I deeply respected telling me that the
exact opposite was true and it gave me a
moment where I was able to stop look at
my perception versus this person's
perception and figure out where my blind
spot was it turned out I was not sparing
other people's emotions by tiptoeing
around my feelings other people would
have preferred if I had just shared them
directly and so it gave me this
opportunity to show up in a very
different way that was able to integrate
both perspectives and again learning to
do this is a skill so some resources
that I recommend for developing this
skill are non-violent communication
authentic relating and radical honesty
all of them have slightly different
flavors and approaches but I have
learned an immense amount from studying
and practicing all three now the next
thing we need to do in order to keep
this process moving smoothly is we need
to be willing to go out actively
searching for the information that we
might be missing when we are feeling
defensive when we're in that space where
someone is saying something or doing
something that is threatening our ego we
have to be willing to pause and go what
might I be missing here which
perspectives is this person holding that
I may not be privy to and that it might
help us both immensely for me to learn
more about so this does not mean
abandoning my ego it does not mean
deciding that everything I think is
false it just means being willing to
pause in those moments and ask
open-ended questions so questions like
hey what was it like for you when you
said this thing to me what was going on
in your mind and your body because maybe
you have a story that someone is sharing
something with you or giving you
feedback in a way that is very malicious
when in fact that's not what's happening
at all maybe there's a way you are
interpreting this other person's
Behavior based on your own ego biases
about how the world and other people
work that is actually not true at all to
their experience so we have to be
willing to get really curious about
what's going on inside of other people's
inner worlds and to be more Curious than
we are defensive and if that feels very
scary to you I want to remind you to
hark back to point number one this
process only works when there is mutual
trust and when you have a belief that
this person does have valuable and
relatively level-headed perspectives to
offer even if you don't agree with them
all of the time that's going to go a
long way in allowing ourselves to
temporarily drop our defenses and
consider what we might be missing that
the other person can see more clearly
about the situation we're in and the
last thing we're going to talk about
today that's really important for this
process is understand that it's going to
be very painful and
challenging so I think that one of the
number one things that trips people up
about close intimate connections is that
it's not about feeling good and happy
and like your self-esteem is healing all
of the time well we do of course want
our partners to have a basic level of
respect and care for our feelings in
this process and that is very important
more often than not having our beliefs
about ourselves and the way that we show
up in the world confronted is going to
be very painful and very bruising for
our egos so we have to learn to expect
that as a part of the process and not
simply project all of those negative
feelings onto our partner and deciding
that they are the cause of all of our
misery seeing ourselves in new lights
especially lights that we might consider
to be a little bit unflattering is going
to be very triggering it's going to be
very activating it's going to be very
frustrating and it's going to be very
hard to not immediately get angry at the
mirror which is our intimate connection
with that other person instead of
recognizing that there's something
valuable to be
so we have to develop an awareness of
the fact that we're going to need a lot
of time and practice integrating the
things that we learn about ourselves
through
intimacy and we might also have to
develop a lot of agreements with our
partner or with whoever it is we're in
that deep connection with about how to
do this in a way that is compassionate
and that allows you to really have the
trust to go there without either of you
feeling as though the other person is
not on your team at the end of the day
the only way for this process to work is
for both people to be more committed to
growth and to Healing the relationship
than they are to their own
egos that sounds simple it is a
humongous ask to really trust someone
enough and to want a connection with
someone enough to be willing to accept
that some of the ways you've been
showing up in the world your entire life
might not actually be working as well as
you thought is a very significant
process to go through and we call that
process love most people when they think
about love think about feeling very warm
and cozy and connected all of the time
but love in reality in its purest form
is exposure to truth and caring for each
other and being present with each other
and empathetic towards each other as
that truth gets
navigated if either person is not
committed to that process and does have
that belief that love means glossing
over the truth and doing only what's
comfortable it's highly unlikely that
relationship is going to be a place
where deep attachment healing takes
place and of course in this process
you're going to need tons of other
resources you're going to need Community
Support you're going to potentially need
outside professional support in the
realm of therapy or coaches or wherever
it is that you can get these resources
for developing these skills reading
books is another great resource and it's
going to take an incredible amount of
time but it can be a really beautiful
process along the way that brings the
two of you closer together as you each
stay committed to the growth that could
happen through committing to this type
of
process all right
I think that's all I have to say for
today on this topic as always let me
know what you guys are thinking feeling
any questions that have come up for you
as you go through this video as always I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again really
[Music]
soon