hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel
we're talking about the fear of
Abandonment and what I want to go over
is how this fear itself can become a
self-fulfilling prophecy so when we have
a very simple and direct model of
self-fulfilling prophecies it looks
something like this we have a belief we
act as though the belief is the truth of
the world because we actually think that
it is right and then we go around self-
selecting scenarios that confirm our
belief and not noticing or not kind of
logging scenarios that disconfirm our
belief so we're engaging mostly with
things that reinforce what we already
believe to be true and then we get more
of the same thing that we believe is
true and that reinforces the original
belief that this is the way the world is
so if we were to run the fear of
Abandonment through this kind of simple
belief model it would look like this so
we might hold the belief everybody is
going to abandon me it's only a matter
of when and then in our relationships we
treat people as though they are
necessarily going to abandon us and then
because we treat them that way they end
up leaving or abandoning us which brings
us right back to our original belief but
this specific sequence of beliefs and
actions could apply perfectly to someone
with more secure patterns in to be
securely attached means to be grounded
in reality and the reality the absolute
truth of The Human Condition is that
everybody we love absolutely will
abandon us at some point or another in
some large or small way they will either
abandon us when we are with them on this
planet or they will eventually abandon
us through death no matter how secure
your relationship is there is no
relationship out there where Partners do
not in small ways fail to show up for
each other or experience conflicts and
ruptures along the course of their
relationship so abandonment is baked
into the essence of every type of
relationship that we will ever have if
we are insecurely attached and living
with this deep fear of Abandonment what
we are actually trying to do is Achieve
an unachievable goal which is never get
getting abandoned there is no way to
personal develop our way into the type
of person who will never get abandoned
under any circumstance what we actually
need to do is find a way to shift our
mindset towards the more secure model of
Abandonment which looks the exact same
right secure people do believe that
everybody is going to leave them at some
point or another and the way that they
treat people when it comes to this
second step right of treating people as
though they will abandon you is they
treat them with presence and gratitude
while they are with them because if I
know that everybody I love is someday
going to leave me I just don't know how
or when it feels like an Incredible Gift
to be treasured anytime I do have them
in my presence and anytime we are
feeling connected to each other but if
I'm living with a fear of abandonment I
am so preoccupied with my thoughts about
the future where I won't have this
person in my life anymore that I cannot
be present with them in the moment and
this is what separates out a fear of
Abandonment from the fundamental human
nature that we all share which is that
abandonment is a part of life so what we
want to Target here is the fear because
it's that fear that is robbing us of the
experience of deep presence and
connection with the people in our lives
and it's that fear if removed that's
going to return us to a state of reality
where we understand that abandonment is
inevitable but we don't have to give up
all of the good parts of our lives that
are available to us before it happens so
I kind of liken this to someone who has
more generalized anxiety and they might
have a lot of thoughts about all the
different ways they could die that
person is not less likely to die than
someone who does not have generalized
anxiety the same existential and
physical threats aren't present for both
of them all of the time maybe with some
variation based on lifestyle preferences
but definitely not enough variation to
protect one from ever dying or getting
harmed the difference is that one of
those people lives with chronic worry
and chronic mental suffering while the
other does not they both exist in the
same based reality but one of them is
having a much more fulfilling experience
and one of them is having an experience
of chronic suffering So today we're
going to talk about what gives us this
deep fear of Abandonment if that fear
that anxiety that worry is something
that we live with and what would need to
happen so that we could shift out of
that and we could enjoy being present
with the lives that we have without
chronically feeling preoccupied IED by
what might happen in the future or what
losses we are bound to incur and I
definitely do not believe that living
with this fear of Abandonment is a
choice or that it's random it's usually
a direct product of the experiences that
we've been through in life but it's not
necessarily the experiences that we
might consciously tie it to so we might
think I have a fear of Abandonment
because of my first boyfriend Ricky who
left me for a hotter girl in high school
when in reality the fear that led to to
that worry about abandonment actually
started much earlier than that when we
were abandoned in some significant way
in childhood at a time when we needed to
not be so the difference between getting
abandoned from a child State versus
getting abandoned from an adult state is
that when we are abandoned as children
what often happens is we are cut off
from learning in some significant way
because when we are young
what we need from our caregivers and
from the people who are there to provide
us with support through life is the
safety to grow into ourselves as
autonomous beings so if there is some
significant way in which our caregivers
abandon us as children there may have
been crucial things we did not learn we
might really struggle with emotional
literacy and understanding ourselves
when we are alone with ourselves or we
might have gaps in our sexual
development if certain events happened
to us at a young age that caused us to
shut down parts of ourselves that were
innately connected to our sexual
development we may have never learned
crucial skills around providing for
ourselves and seeing ourselves as
capable and worthy so when we are
literal children and we are still
emotionally and cognitively growing into
ourselves when we are abandoned it means
that we are getting cut off from
mentorship and wholeness because without
that mentorship that we need to help us
make sense of ourselves and how we exist
in the world we're not going to grow
into people who are aware of ourselves
in all areas there's going to be some
Gap in the way that we experience
ourselves in whatever area we were
abandoned as young children so this
leads to self-abandonment if I was never
really mentored in a particular way or I
never had an adult help me contain and
make sense of my experiences in some
area when I grow up
that area is going to be an area that I
naturally neglect in myself unless and
until I draw conscious attention to it
so now there's some way in which I am
cut off for my wholeness as an adult if
there were significant places where I
was abandoned as a child now let's
contrast this to the type of support and
mentorship and containment that people
who air more securely attached tended to
have as children when we have support
all the way through in our childhood
growing into the people that we are
going to be as adults which means
developing both our emotional selves but
also our intellectual selves and our
skills for practically navigating the
world and our relationships to our
bodies and to our spiritual selves if we
have good enough mentorship in all of
these areas it gives us the scaffolding
we need as adults to kind of take over
our own development in those areas and
so now when we're out in the world
whether or not we're in close connection
with other people we feel whole we feel
as though we have internalized enough
resource to go out and source for
ourselves whatever we need to continue
to develop in the areas that we want to
do more work in so to be secure as an
adult means that you have self- intimacy
and there aren't significant areas of
yourself that you naturally self-
abandon or fail to show up for yourself
in when we aren't needing other people
to come along and help us kind of
fulfill parts of ourselves that we have
never found a way to stay present with
and develop inside of ourselves we form
connections with other people
predominantly for serving the purpose of
just having company so we might turn to
our close- loved ones for co-regulation
and for sharing our experiences of life
but we don't feel incomplete as people
when we do not have them around so when
we are abandoned temporarily or in
larger ways it doesn't cause a crisis of
self the same way that it does for
someone who is approaching abandonment
from that place of childhood wounding
where abandonment even as an adult might
still feel like you are being deprived
of the resources that you need to be a
whole person so we're going to look at
how this cycle perpetuates itself so if
you have those early developmental unmet
needs how that can lead to a cycle of
Abandonment that can be excruciatingly
painful in less and until we start to
address the problem at its core so this
entire thing starts off through nobody's
intentional Choice with that unmet
developmental need so let's say you were
developing relatively normally up until
a certain age in a certain area whether
that is emotional self-awareness
interpersonal skills autonomy whatever
it is and then either some abandonment
happened so maybe your parent had some
block that came up for them in their
teenage years that left them immature in
a particular way and so now they can't
really enter you emotionally any further
so there's some developmental wound some
way in which you have not yet grown into
your adult self that is present for you
that you may or may not be conscious of
and again what this leads to is self-
abandonment in that area so if you never
learned emotional regulation skills
you're going to not be able to stay
present with yourself when really strong
emotions come up you might instead go
into some sort of panic response and try
to get your need met externally instead
of being present with yourself and doing
whatever emotional regulation you were
taught as a child and when we are
abandoning ourselves in significant
areas what tends to happen is we only
feel like we are whole when we are
having the needs that we abandon
ourselves around met externally so now
we're in this place where we only feel
whole when we are in a particular type
of intimate connection with someone else
because they are being present with us
in the areas that we don't know how to
be present with ourselves and this often
feels like a crazy big high so this is
the kind of love we fall into where it
feels like we are finally complete and
whole in a way that we didn't know was
possible and if we don't know any
different we might assume that's what
love feels like for everyone rather than
more secure love feeling like a more
equal experience of deep companionship
and appreciation so in that more secure
form of love you have two people
relating to each other for Mutual adult
States in their ego neither is turning
to the other as their sole source of
getting some really deep and painful
need met both are relatively resourced
and they're relating to each other as
equals but when we're in this place
where we do have that giant gaping need
that we have no idea how to F for
ourselves or maybe no conscious
awareness that it even exists it is
going to feel
excruciating if we experience a
separation or a rupture from the person
who is meeting that need for us because
when a secure person gets abandoned what
they are losing is the other person's
company when an insecure person gets
abandoned what they are losing touch
with in a lot of cases is their sense of
wholeness and this is much more painful
and feel feels much more personal than
the former the problem is that we are
generally unconscious of this being the
case all we know is that it feels
excruciatingly painful when someone
leaves and so now if we are in this
place and we get abandoned we are not
responding to the other person as though
we are losing their company we are
responding to the other person as though
they are robbing us of our wholeness and
that is a very very large crime to be
punishing someone for and the thing is
it is literally true if we only feel
whole around this other person that when
we are not around them we don't feel
whole so our emotional selves are
telling us the truth about what is
happening but with the wrong
attribution it is not this person's
fault that we do not feel whole when we
are alone their absence is just just
returning us to the state of
fragmentation and lack of wholeness that
was there before they came along but
because our emotional selves don't know
that we're just going to feel the
intensity of the pain and assume that
they're leaving is what caused that and
this is where it gets really easy to
push even the most secure of people away
because if we are punishing someone for
a crime as great as robbing us of our
wholeness it's going to feel very conf
refusing to the other person when the
only crime they committed in reality was
robbing us of their company which is a
painful experience right if we're in a
secure connection with someone and we're
having a moment where we really want
them to be present and with us and we
want that co-regulation and they're just
not able to meet us there it's going to
feel lonely but it's not going to feel
unbearable because we still have that
inner resource to show up for ourselves
in that moment but again if as soon as
someone is gone we'll return to the
state that feels unbearable for us we're
going to be punishing them for an
offense that is much greater than the
one that they actually committed and
this is in most cases going to lead to
feelings of
disorientation confusion and resentment
in the other person because they know on
an emotional level I am being punished
to a much higher magnitude than what
fits the actual crime or even in the
best case scenario where they're
desperately trying to give us what we
need if we ourselves are not deeply
conscious of what that need is they are
never going to be able to fulfill it for
us and we are going to continuously try
to get them to and So eventually our
partner might start feeling like they
are up against an impossible task which
in most cases is going to lead to
Chronic feelings of overwhelm like there
are expectations they have no idea how
to fulfill and disconnection which might
lead to the relationship ending
and that's going to reinforce that
belief right everybody leaves and then
you're right back where you started in
that place of self-abandonment when
we're in that place at the end of a
relationship the fixation we develop
mentally might be how do I find a
partner who is not going to abandon me
next time but that question is the wrong
question the question we need to be
asking is what are these huge unmet
needs I am placing on my partner that
are causing tiny abandonments to feel so
unbearable so we're going to contrast
this with what a more secure
relationship cycle looks like when it
faces moments of Abandonment just to get
a little bit of an idea of how else this
could go so when we do have that good
enough development as children and we
grow into relatively secure adults who
feel whole in their emotional selves now
in the place of that self-abandonment we
have self- intimacy and wholeness so the
ability to feel like a complete person
when we are on our own and being a
complete and whole person includes a
sense of security and an ease in which
we form connections the world naturally
feels abundant with people we could have
potential connections with because we
know that we have the skills we need to
relate from an adult to adult place so
when we are around others we're relating
from that adult to adult place where we
feel whole and we are appreciating the
wholeness of someone else
then if and when an abandonment happens
so a rupture occurs in the relationship
there's an argument something goes wrong
instead of Desperately clamoring to
figure out how to get back into a state
of feeling whole we're able to focus on
how we can invite the other person back
into a state of
connection because we are okay and we
assume that they are okay and capable of
taking care of themselves and so the
only thing to really figure out is what
wasn't working here where were we not on
the same page how were we not aligning
and how can we make sure in the future
we're able to stay in Connection in this
area or maybe this is an area where
we're just never really going to be
super close but this particular area
isn't one where it feels particularly
important for them to always be on the
same page as us maybe this is an area
where we have friends who can fulfill
those emotional intimacy needs in the
way that we need and vice versa so
there's a lot of flexibility and
creativity when it comes to how to stay
in connection so now when there's some
sort of rupture there's somewhere you
really wanted your partner to meet you
and see you where they didn't and you
make that invitation to them hey I'm
comfortable with this part of myself I
want to show it to you and I want to
feel seen by you here are you willing to
do that with me are you willing to kind
of work with me to get on the same page
in this area or not if they are able to
meet you there now you're back in adult
to adult connection or if the request
does not work for the other person maybe
they themselves are not particularly
secure and they haven't met themselves
in an area where you're asking them to
meet you and that request feels too
overwhelming for them it could lead to a
rupture that doesn't get repaired and
maybe the relationship ends but if so
where do you get returned to back to
that place of self- intimacy and
wholeness which once again gives you the
skills you need for going out and
sourcing new secure connections from a
place of resource rather than
despiration so again the goal here is
not to become
unabandoned and it's also not to find a
partner who we are absolutely certain is
never going to abandon us it's to build
ourselves and to reparent ourselves into
people who can tolerate abandonment on
both a small scale and a large one that
is the thing that's going to make that
chronic fear of Abandonment that robs us
of our ability to be present and
appreciative of our relationships and
our lives as they're happening finally
leave us alone so the oldest and most
well-known study in attachment theory is
known as the strange situation procedure
it was a procedure developed by a woman
named Mary answorth right at the
beginning of attachment Theory springing
into existence where she designed a
stressful situation that showed patterns
of behavior that different children
exhibited in a situation where they got
separated from their caregiver so in the
strange situation procedure what would
happen is a child and a parent would be
playing in a room and then a stranger
would come into the room and then the
parent would leave the room so the child
would now be alone with the stranger
children who were not securely attached
experienced prolonged longed distress
responses to their parents being gone so
once their parents left the room if the
children aired more anxious they tended
to get extremely distraught and stay
distraught until the parent returned if
they aired avoidant they tended to
ignore the stranger and stay really
focused on playing with their toys or
self- soothing in some way but they were
experiencing physiological distress
while their parents were gone secure
children tended to cry when their
parents left the room but then they
would adjust to the situation and they
would often turn to the stranger who
they had witnessed their parent
interacting with in a trustful way and
they would play with the stranger which
would help ease their distress so what
we see happening in this situation is
secure children do experience grief and
pain when they feel separated from their
caregivers but they're able to adjust to
the situation that they're left in
because they have an internal working
model of the world as a safe place where
their needs can get met so instead of
staying fixated on the fact that their
caregiver is gone they turn to what
options are available in my environment
now interpersonally that will help me
meet my needs now that I've experienced
and moved through my grief over my needs
not getting met in the way that I wanted
which is by my caregiver and this is the
same model we want to end up with as
adults when we are secure adults we
still experience pain and grief and
distress when we are abandoned by the
people we're closest to whether that is
once again a very overt abandonment so
someone leaving us or someone dying or a
more commonplace small scale abandonment
so our partner being kind of zoned out
when we really want their attention or
something like that we still experience
that grief and that pain of
disconnection but because we are
internally resourced we're able to
readjust once we move through that pain
and go okay if this person is not
available to me for whatever reason in
this moment who can I turn to to get my
needs met how can I find a different way
to self-regulate so there's a lot of
flexibility and adaptiveness in the
secure model of processing including
processing abandonment it will still
hurt to get abandoned but that hurt will
not be the stopping point point that
hurt will be something that is faced
directly moved through and then a
solution will be found on the other side
so the real trick here is figuring out
at what part of that process am I
blocked like the avoidant child am I
blocked in the area that causes me to
experience conscious distress over my
caregiver leaving so if this is the case
as an adult you might not feel much
consciously when you're experiencing
separation or abandonment but you will
still be having an elevated stress
response that you are not aware of and
because you won't be dealing with that
and moving through it on an emotional
level that stress is likely to persist
and you're likely to have your blinders
on when it comes to how you could get
your interpersonal needs met now and if
you air more anxious you might feel so
preoccupied with the way that you want
your needs to get met which is through a
specific other person that you might
struggle to self-regulate in the face of
grief and distress
so you never move through your emotions
in a way that allows you to arrive on
the other side of them and notice what
options are available to you now so what
we want to look at is where is the area
where I need to increase my self
resource so that I can feel whole in the
instances where I am being abandoned do
I need to up my emotional literacy do I
need to learn that the times when I
feeling physiologically distressed it's
likely there's some emot
that I'm repressing that needs to be
brought into my conscious awareness or
do I need to find a way to contain my
emotions and lean on my ability to be
autonomous as an adult so that I feel
whole and complete when I am on my own
and all of this is in essence just the
art of attachment healing right the art
of rounding ourselves out in the areas
where we once experience neglect or
abandonment and becoming people who are
able to cope with a wide variet of
situations that life might throw at us
again this will not keep us from being
abandoned but it will take the fear and
preoccupation out of our experience and
when that is out of our experience we
can be more present more engaged more
grateful for the people in our lives
which is both likely to lead to less
abandonment but also likely to just
increase our satisfaction with our life
and our relationships all around no
matter how they end up
going all right I think that's all I'm
going to say for today on the topic of
the fear of Abandonment but as always
let me know in the comments what you
guys are thinking feeling any questions
you have I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again very
soon
[Music]