hey guys heidi preeb here welcome to my
channel if you're new on this channel we
talk about attachment theory personality
types and all things that help us
understand ourselves and other people
better so today we are talking about the
avoidant attachment style and which
early experiences lead children to
develop this style so generally our
attachment styles form before the age of
two or three and they do grow and
dynamically change with us over the
course of our lives however if we do not
do specific therapeutic intervention on
our attachment styles generally our
adult attachment experiences in a more
sophisticated and complex way mimic our
early experiences of attachment and the
reason this happens is because when we
are one or two years old our brains are
incredibly malleable we are taking in a
butt ton of information about the world
and what makes it up particularly how we
exist in relation to other people
because our caregivers are our first
experiences of getting our needs met in
the world and so the things that we
learn at that age get hardwired into our
brain and the way that that happens is
through the process of neurons
continuously firing and wiring together
right so if you have one experience
paired with another experience over and
over and over again your brain learns
these two things are related to each
other and then as we grow up we learn to
depend on that information and seek out
experiences that meet that world view
whatever we expect in the world we tend
to end up finding so our very early
experiences of attachment and of the
relationships that we form with the
people who brought us into this world or
the people who elected to raise us from
a young age become the primary lens
through which we view all relationships
especially intimate relationships where
there is some type of interdependency
involved which is probably already a
term that feels very uncomfortable if
you are avoidantly attached now the
early environment of avoidantly attached
adults was often one that was consistent
and predictable but it was consistently
and predictably hostile so what that
means is that certain emotions were
rejected by their caregivers now this is
important and this is also very
difficult to process because when you're
an infant your emotions and your
displays of emotion are your only way to
communicate how you'll have your needs
met so imagine if currently you lived in
a world where everyone else was using
money all the time to get their needs
met like you could buy a house with
money you can buy food with money but
for some reason every time you went and
tried to use money it was rejected
didn't matter if you used credit debit
cash whatever it was every time you went
and tried to pay for something with
money the person was like sorry we don't
take your money you would learn my money
is not worth anything ergo i have to
find an alternate way of gathering
resource that does not involve money and
you might find if i go let's say view an
apartment and i tell the person i'm
interested in this apartment but don't
bring up money at all and then the
person offers you the apartment without
any money being exchanged you would
quickly learn me not talking about money
is actually the thing that gets me the
thing that other people use money to buy
and this is similar to how emotion works
for the avoidantly attached person so
when you were a very young child
whatever it was in your caregiver that
left them unable to process and mirror
your negative emotional experiences led
you to believe that if i deny and
repress my negative emotions i get my
needs met so let's say you're a parent
with someone who was avoidantly attached
themselves so anytime you cried or made
a fuss or showed anger your parent may
have wanted to be emotionally present
but they may have unconsciously been
very rejecting of your displays of
emotion it's also possible if you had an
anxiously attached caregiver they saw
your displays of emotion as a threat
because maybe they went wait i need my
emotional needs met if i spend all my
time tending to this person's emotional
needs who's going to see and care for
mine so there may have consciously or
unconsciously likely unconsciously been
a reason why your parent was
consistently a little bit hostile
detached unable to be present with your
emotional displays as a child and this
doesn't mean they didn't give you what
you needed in terms of physical
resources but they didn't learn to tend
to your emotional experiences and be
present with you when you are displaying
emotion now for most children emotions
are currency so they can exchange crying
for being soothed they can exchange
anger for getting an injustice noticed
they can exchange the expression of fear
for protection but for you you learned
that when you expressed negative
emotions no one would take your currency
it was not accepted at the location that
was your caregiver so you learn to get
what i want i have to suppress my own
negative emotion it's not that as an
infant you had something against
negative emotions you just learned
through conditioning showing my emotions
is not useful it does not get me what i
want in some cases it actually might get
me rejected so what i have to do to get
my needs met is appear as though i don't
have emotions or appear as though the
only emotions i feel are positive so
maybe my parent is very responsive to me
when i'm giggling or making a joke or
when i smile at them and so i learned
okay positive emotions are good positive
emotions are okay to show but negative
ones like crying or screaming or being
angry don't get me anywhere and so your
brain actually learns from a very young
age to start dismissing negative
emotional experiences so whereas another
child will go oh i'm angry it must mean
that i'm experiencing an injustice in my
environment and if i bring it to the
attention of my caregiver they will help
me by either explaining to me why this
is happening in a way that soothes my
anger because i now understand what i
thought was an injustice is not because
there's a different reason than i
thought behind it or my parent will help
me by going your right that is an
injustice let's fight against it or
let's correct the situation but you may
have learned when i feel anger if i
express it i actually get left alone so
the best case scenario is that i keep
quiet when i'm angry don't tell anyone
how i'm feeling and find a way to get my
need met in other ways your feelings
were seen as unimportant information so
your brain did not learn to focus very
hard on them instead your brain learned
to be quite strategic about noticing my
parent does respond to this here's kind
of the rules that govern my physical
environment and you learn to play into
those rules that probably gave you a
pretty good ability to navigate the
world of cause and effect but as an
adult if you have an avoidant attachment
style you still probably have a very low
level of awareness around your negative
emotional experiences to the point where
you might actually only notice this is
the case when something happens to you
let's say a death or a breakup or
something that you feel like you should
feel a strong negative emotion around it
makes sense to you that other people
experience this response in relation to
that stimuli but you just can't feel the
feelings that you think you're supposed
to feel now this does not mean that
you're a psychopath this is not divorced
from the ability to feel empathy which
avoidance very much possess it's about
being desensitized to your own emotional
experiences particularly with negative
emotions you learned to first assess the
situation figure out which emotions were
acceptable within that situation and
then feel whichever emotions you believe
are appropriate for that situation so if
you have a feeling come up that you
think doesn't really make sense for you
to be having your instinct is to find a
way to dismiss that emotion within
yourself or talk yourself out of the
experience of that emotion so you might
feel angry and instead of taking that
anger seriously and going something must
be happening that's unjust which is why
this feeling of anger is coming up for
me you might first look at your
environment and if you can't find
something that very blatantly indicates
that your anger is valid you probably
assume that your feeling is incorrect
and kind of rationalize with yourself
and go well it doesn't make sense for me
to be angry ergo i must not be angry i
must be wrong about my feeling or i must
find a way to get rid of that feeling
and so as an adult the process of
healing from an avoidant attachment
style becomes the process of
re-sensitizing yourself to your
emotional experiences and being able to
unpair
cause and effect from your emotions so
what that looks like is being able to
validate your emotional experience
without validating the external
environment that might be causing it so
for example you might feel like oh i'm
really jealous but it doesn't make sense
for me to be feeling jealous because my
partner is free to let's say have
crushes on other people but instead of
deciding that your emotion is wrong you
can learn emotions do not always dictate
the way that i need to act and the
problem is when we're insecurely
attached most of us have paired emotion
with action so we think if i feel
jealous i have to get angry or i have to
rage or whatever it is but you can learn
i can feel jealous and i can maybe bring
that feeling to a counselor and work
with it and try to figure out if there's
something in my relationship that even
though my partner is not giving me a
reason to feel insecure i'm still
feeling and maybe there's something
subtle there that you've never noticed
because you don't have that inner
sensitization to your own feelings so
you might only feel a certain thing once
it crosses the threshold of being very
strong so maybe there have been 10
different instances in which you've seen
your partner kind of subtly flirting
with other people or whatever it is that
have eventually crossed this threshold
of you feeling jealous and instead of
saying that doesn't make sense because i
don't have a singular overt reason to
feel that way working with a
professional can help you understand all
of the tiny little instances that
eventually lead to you feeling a certain
way which is often how emotions show up
they are the accumulation of many
different pieces of information that
eventually compile into a hole and often
you find that hole easy to dismiss if it
is not represented by a singular blatant
undeniable experience in your
environment so you might go if they're
not actually cheating if they're not
literally having sex with another person
behind my back and not telling me about
it i have no reason to feel jealous but
that's not necessarily true but you
don't need a blatant reason to feel a
feeling right feelings just are and how
you choose to act on them is not a
direct reflection of what you're feeling
you can learn to feel one way and act
another way without having to dismiss
the way that you feel so i'm going to
make a video in the future about the
value of dealing with negative emotions
as someone who has an avoidant
attachment style but for now we're just
kind of laying down the bare basics of
how you arrived at a place where you
believed that negative emotions had
little to no value now there's another
factor that comes into play with
avoidant attachment which is having a
sense of over responsibility for one's
problems so at first glance this can
look like a good thing and avoidance do
tend to pride themselves on solving all
their own problems being very
self-reliant not needing other people or
not being a burden on other people but
they can do this at the expense of their
own accurate view of the world so
because avoidingly attached children
learned not to go to their caregivers
and expect things like sympathy or
support or to have their worldview
validated they learned i have to find a
way to feel like i am in control of my
life and the way that i can do that is
by making everything about me now
children naturally do this this is not
exclusive to avoidant attachment all
children naturally feel like they are
the center of the universe and
everything that happens to them in some
ways a reflection of who they are as a
person the difference is that because
avoidant children did not learn to
co-regulate the same way that other
children did which means they did not
learn to take those world views take the
negative emotions that they feel bring
them to someone who's older and wiser
and has a better idea of what's going on
than them and who might be able to
disconfirm that this thing is about them
so that kind of childhood view of
everything that happens is because i
caused it is still relatively present in
avoidantly attached adults so there's
this deep inner sense of almost like i
don't exist in relationship with other
people so what that means is all of the
results that i get in life must be
because of something i did it couldn't
possibly be that someone else is
impacting the way that i'm experiencing
life or the things that are happening to
me and this can lead to very flawed
thinking there's also another video that
i'm going to make that talks about
specifically your experience of
repulsion as an adult with an avoidant
attachment style so a lot of avoidantly
attached adults often find that they
feel very readily kind of repulsed or
disgusted by certain things that maybe
their partner does or even that their
children do and often this is a road map
to figuring out which emotions were
consistently rejected in you as a child
which are now shame-bound for you so
when you are very young and your
caregiver consistently rejects or shows
disgust at you expressing a certain
emotion you learn having that emotion is
shameful and expressing it is especially
shameful so as an adult often when you
see other people let's say exaggerating
their vulnerability exaggerating their
need exaggerating how sad they are you
might feel an almost overwhelming
feeling of disgust and you might want to
distance yourself from that as much as
humanly possible now you might be
correct in that those displays are over
the top especially if you're surrounding
yourself with people who have more of an
anxious attachment style which in the
anxious video we talk about why those
displays are often kind of heightened as
an adult but you learned as a child that
one should be rejected if one displays
those emotions so you might actually
feel quite angry when you see other
people expressing those emotions and
having them taken seriously because you
think that the way the world should work
is that if you repress all of those
emotions if you deal with everything on
your own without asking for help you
should be rewarded for that but often
this is not how the world works often
people do show their emotions and have
their needs met by showing those
emotions and that can feel infuriating
to you because again it's kind of like
someone walking into a situation
offering money and having it be accepted
where you learned very early on my money
is not accepted and that feels unjust on
a deep level but that sense of injustice
isn't necessarily what's conscious for
you what's conscious for you is that
internalized feeling of disgust and rage
that you feel from having those emotions
rejected in you from a very young age so
i actually think that it's very
interesting when you have an adult with
an avoidant attachment style because
that conscious feeling of anger of rage
of disgust towards other people often is
pointing you directly and specifically
to which emotions you have learned to
repress in yourself and those are the
precise emotions you need to
re-sensitize yourself to in order to
begin the healing process but again
we're going to cover that a lot more in
another video now the last thing you
need to know about avoidant attachment
is that the way you dealt with a large
amount of your uncomfortable feelings as
a child if you have an avoidant
attachment style was denying and
repressing them so again this is
something that your brain does without
you choosing that it's just that
focusing on your emotions didn't get you
anywhere so it's kind of like your brain
was always sorting through which of your
emotions were useful and which were not
and throwing a large amount of them in
this repression bin and a lot of what
got thrown in that repression bin was
blame so you learned when i express my
negative emotions because that's kind of
what blame is right it's expressing our
negative emotions and saying to someone
else i need help i need your
participation either in the form of
words or reparative actions because
something you've done has hurt me so we
put the way that we're feeling on
someone else and again there are lots of
cases where it's not healthy to blame
people but there are many cases where
it's actually very reasonable to go to
someone and say the way that you're
showing up in our relationship is
affecting me negatively and i need to
have boundaries around that if you are
unwilling to change that behavior
however as a child because blame did not
work for you because going to your
caregiver and saying i feel hurt or
rejected or whatever else did not get
you anywhere you learned not to blame
and you learned if i have a negative
emotion it's my responsibility to deal
with it or to just disengage with the
situation that's causing it and as a
result you tend to overtake
responsibility for situations where
actually blame is healthy so especially
when we have someone who is very
avoidantly attached because like
anything it is a spectrum you'll often
see cases of let's say early child abuse
where the person with an avoidant
attachment style cannot recognize it as
abuse because calling something abuse is
a form of blame right
it's about saying the way i feel is the
result of someone else's actions and
that very act of assuming that their
emotional experiences impacted by
someone else is very threatening to the
way that the avoidant learn to process
the world so often their mind finds a
way to frame even abuse that happened to
them through almost a rose-colored lens
so they are very quick to exonerate
their caregivers when they talk about
their early experiences and they might
say something like oh yeah my dad always
used to beat me up but it was for my own
good i was a bad kid and i deserved it
he taught me a lesson there is this
inaccessibility of the pain and the fear
and the vulnerability that was
absolutely on some level felt by that
young abused child but the way that the
brain learned to compensate was to
dismiss those emotions and decide that
what was happening was actually for
their own good and again in the healing
process for people with avoidant
attachment styles there's often a long
process of learning to re-contextualize
one's life experiences and finding out
in which areas the way that you were
feeling actually kind of was caused by
something outside of you re-sensitizing
yourself to the emotions that would have
been appropriate in that situation were
it to have happened to a securely
attached child who had access to their
entire emotional range or at least much
more of their emotional range than
anyone on the insecure spectrum had and
then learning to have compassion for the
child that you were as the adult you now
are with new information but again
before that process begins it can
actually be very difficult for people
with avoidant attachment styles to even
figure out where their attachment style
came from because very often people with
avoidant attachment styles look back on
their pasts as very rosy as nothing went
wrong as everything that happened was
for my own good and one of the only
strong indications that might come up
for you that this is your attachment
style is by noticing just how much
disgust you have for people who do play
the victim right that's often a key
indication that you were never allowed
to play the victim so your brain had to
find a different way to cope with the
circumstances in which you actually were
a victim
it's actually really interesting because
when i did my family rules series so
talking about all of the dysfunctional
family roles that children can take on
in parent-centered homes which means
family systems that operate around
meeting the emotional needs of the
parents rather than the children i had
this one comment that was like oh great
you're just making more victims out of
people and i thought that that comment
was really interesting because
you cannot make more victims out of
people if you are alive if you have been
on this earth for more than like a day
you are absolutely a victim of something
everyone at some point in their lives
has been a victim of something
no one not a single person out there has
made it through life without ever having
something negative happen to them at the
hands of someone else's gain that is
just the human experience even the most
securely attached parents will every
once in a while prioritize themselves
over their children if only for a moment
or two so there is no way to create more
victims but the idea that one could have
made it through their entire life
without ever having been victimized in
any way is absolutely
very avoidant it is that avoidant
mindset of everything that happened to
me i am responsible for and i've never
been a victim of anything else now this
does not mean you have to swing all the
other way to the other side of the
spectrum which is i'm a victim of
everything and nothing that happens to
me is ever my fault there is a very
healthy secure middle ground where you
look at the situation and figure out are
other people trying to take advantage of
me and if so i will form boundaries
around them but for the most part i will
engage in good faith with people but
often you do get that really polarized
world view between avoidant and anxious
people where the avoidant people think
that everyone's playing the victim and
the anxious person thinks that they are
a victim of everyone else's bad behavior
and both don't realize that there is a
very healthy middle ground where you
just understand actual realistic cause
and effect and that is where we are all
trying to head towards ideally in our
healing journey is towards that secure
earned attachment we're able to finally
integrate the parts of your psyche that
you have repressed from a very young age
so whether that is the ability to feel
express and process negative emotion
like the avoidant attachment or the
ability to process and integrate
self-responsibility and cause an effect
like the anxious attachment at the end
of the day it all leads to the same
place which is that healthy balanced
middle ground so we will be talking more
in future videos about how to get there
but for now let me know if you have any
questions in the comments thank you for
coming to hang out with me again for
another half hour or so on youtube i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and i will
see you back here again soon
[Music]
you