hey guys heidi preeb here i currently
have 30 minutes left on this sd card and
usually when i film enfp videos i filmed
them for like an hour and a half and
then cut them down to 15 minutes so
today i'm going to challenge myself by
trying to keep this relatively short and
we'll see what happens but i was also
going through old articles of mine the
other day and i found an article where i
had compiled a whole bunch of answers to
the question how do you win over an enfp
and i remember that this was a series i
did back when i was working at thought
catalog that everyone found to be very
helpful and also a lot of fun which was
just how to win over every type and i
was like you know what i'm gonna make
this into a video because i want all of
us to have better relationships with
each other and to get laid more and to
just be able to relate deeply to the
people in their lives so if you have an
enfp in your life or if you are an enfp
and you are looking for ways to connect
more deeply with the people around you
here are some of the things that are
most important to enfps that will allow
you to get a lot closer to the nfp in
your life a lot more quickly than you
otherwise might be able to so these are
kind of communication hacks maybe i'll
end up doing this for all the types
we'll see but in the interest of not
wasting space on my sd card i'm going to
get right into it so
tip number one for winning over an enfp
whether you're trying to woo them
romantically or whether you're just
trying to form a closer relationship
with one or if you have a family member
who's an enfp who you have trouble
connecting with is take an interest in
their interests now obviously this is
universal advice right anytime you take
an interest in something that somebody
loves it's going to bring you closer
together however something that not a
lot of people understand about enfps is
that we are giant nerds we live so much
of our lives inside of our own minds and
we don't always know who wants to hear
about what's inside of our minds right
like we have so many theories we're
constantly turning over in our brains
we're usually consuming tons of
information about whatever topics
interest us on a daily basis and we're
never really sure who wants to hear us
go on like a giant rant about what we're
thinking about and who would prefer that
we keep it to ourselves so if you can
figure out what your enfp's kind of
nerdy interests are and then you can
gain a working understanding of that
field and start asking your enfp
questions about what they think about
different issues in that field or about
what they're reading about or what
they're interested in in relation to
that that is going to be a very quick
way to make the enfp in your life feel
super comfortable opening up to you
because our dominant cognitive function
is extroverted intuition by the way if
you don't know what i'm talking about
when i say cognitive functions i'm
talking about the different areas of
your brain that you use to process
information make decisions process your
emotions relate to other people and i go
into depth about what each of these
cognitive functions looks like and how
it shows up for you in your life in my
six week soul boot camp course for enfps
which you can check out at my website
www.heidiprev.com
and i will leave the link to that in the
description of this video
now we are extroverted intuitive
dominant types and what that means is
that we are always on about some new
theory like we live our life first in
theory than in reality and if you can
find a way to engage with your enfp
about the theories that they are turning
over in their minds and that they are
spending most of their days thinking
about you have to be careful because you
will be opening up a floodgate but they
will be more than happy usually to share
with you all of their thoughts on a
given topic and it will feel like a
massive relief that someone finally
wants to know about what's in their
minds so i remember someone telling me
one time that they had met an intj who
said that their love language was
someone reading their research papers
they were an academic researcher and i
think that whether or not your enfp is
in academics or is in research that is
precisely the concept of what makes us
feel loved right someone really caring
about what's going on inside of our
minds how we're thinking about things
how we're perceiving the world and what
our opinions are is absolutely the
enfp's love language right because we
have such strong opinions about so many
things and we have so many thoughts that
we're constantly turning over in our
brains and knowing that someone cares
about that and that someone wants to
know more about what we think is the
number one thing that i think makes
enfps feel seen and loved we are such
bubbly people such good-natured people
but a lot of people overlook the fact
that we are primarily intellectual
people and we're always going to be the
happiest when we can share what's going
on inside of our intellectual minds with
someone else now to take things in a
totally different direction tip number
two for winning over an enfp is make us
laugh and again this goes for any type
nobody doesn't like to laugh but enfps
kind of have these two sides to their
personality right one is super bubbly
and outgoing and lighthearted but the
other side of us is that we're very
emotionally deep we do take life very
seriously inside of our own minds and
when we find someone who we can connect
with through shared humor it really kind
of lightens that experience for us
because we can get really caught up in
our kind of existential musings when
someone comes along and they can just
make a joke out of things that we are
feeling and thinking very heavily about
a lot of the time that is such a quick
way to connect with that person and this
kind of naturally follows from point
number one right because if you
understand what we're thinking about and
what topics we're kind of turning over
in our minds in a very deep way and then
you can make us laugh about it that is
going to create this beautiful union of
feeling like we can trust you with our
thoughts and feelings but also like it
doesn't have to be so serious all the
time right i think that the number one
trait i personally look for when it
comes to friends partners any type of
relationship that i want to grow into
something more long-term is a shared
sense of humor someone who finds the
same things that i find funny funny
because enfps are at their core just
very into experiencing all the different
facets of life we tend to be very
comfortable with discomfort and so we
love when we can find that trait in
another person and we know i can go into
any situation with this person and even
if it's terrible even if it's
uncomfortable we're gonna find something
to laugh about right that trait is
probably the number one thing that i
personally look for when i'm looking for
someone who i want to really take my
relationship of any form to the next
level with so a shared sense of humor is
a really big green flag and tip number
three is going to address a red flag
which is
to win over an enfp make sure that you
are respecting their independence and
that you have your own sense of
independence so
a big red flag for most enfps very early
on is if they feel like someone is
trying to suffocate them or smother them
that is very scary for us because we are
people who have a humongous varied
amount of interests we really like to
explore lots of different areas of life
and we need to have the space and
freedom to do that without feeling like
that exploration is going to threaten
the relationship that we have with
someone so some people prefer to have
relationships where there is not a lot
of independent exploration happening
outside the relationship and if that's
the kind of person you are that is
totally fine but an enfp might not be
the best choice of a serious romantic
partner or a close friend for you
because an enfp is going to feel pretty
smothered by someone who doesn't give
them a lot of time to do their own thing
to go into the world to have new
experiences and then to come back and
share those experiences with the people
they love that's truly what makes us the
happiest in life so to scare off an enfp
immediately try to smother them try to
make their world very small tell them
that they can't do something or try to
set limits on their freedom right they
are going to get out of your life very
quickly if you're trying any of that but
if you want to grow a relationship with
them that's going to last make sure you
show them that you really respect their
freedom that you really want them to
have an independent life where they're
doing their own thing a lot of the time
and that you're really excited to hear
about the adventures that they're having
to share in a lot of those adventures
with them if and when it makes sense for
you to have shared experiences and part
and parcel with this comes your ability
to showcase your own independence and
once again if you are not a person who
is very independent you are probably not
going to be served immensely by having a
relationship with an enfp but if you are
someone who has a lot of your own stuff
going on and who really does feel like
they also like to have a lot of
independence within a relationship this
could be a great match because the enfp
is probably going to be very drawn to
the zest that you have for life as well
right and they're probably going to
appreciate the fact that you're a person
who has a lot of their own interests who
has friends and a life of their own and
who isn't looking to kind of lose
themselves in another person but who's
just looking to share the things that
you're both super excited about whenever
it makes sense for you to and obviously
depending on the nature of your
relationship you might have to negotiate
how much independence versus
interdependence your relationship
entails but i think you'll find that as
long as you're not making them feel
smothered or like you are expecting them
to give up things they love in order to
be a part of your life enfps are pretty
open to having those negotiations
because we do care very deeply about the
people that we love and we do really
want to invest in relationships that
feel right for us we just need to know
that we're not going to lose ourselves
within those relationships so finding
someone who has a strong sense of
independence and who has a lot of their
own things going on and who respects
that we're the same way is going to go a
really really long way for enfps when it
comes to figuring out who they want to
invest heavily in whether that's a
friendship a romantic relationship or
just any type of person we might want to
get to know better and again that's kind
of universal like having your own things
going on and having things you care
about and are passionate about and being
excited by what other people are
passionate about that's just hot it
doesn't matter who you are or who you're
trying to win over relationships require
people being willing and excited to
share themselves with each other without
losing touch of who they are
independently right tip number four and
in my opinion this is always the thing
that's going to take it to the next
level with an enfp have meaningful
shared experiences with them so enfps
are not very vocal about this but we
think of our lives like stories like we
are constantly kind of unpacking and
writing the story of our own lives and
the people who we share really
meaningful experiences with are now
written into the stories of our lives
right and once a character is written
into the story of our lives in a
meaningful way as long as we're happy
with the role that they've played in our
story we have a very strong motivation
to continue to write them into the next
chapters the reason being is that enfps
are secretly some of the most
sentimental mofos you will ever meet in
your life and again we are not allowed
about this we might even try
intentionally to hide this but we are
so deeply sentimental and when we share
meaningful experiences with people we
reflect on those for years and years to
come like i am embarrassed actually by
how much i reflect on my past and how
much i treasure the memories that i've
made with the friends and the people i
love it feels like i put a lot more
emphasis on that than other people but i
think anyone with either introverted
feeling or introverted sensing but
especially if you have both of them in
your cognitive stacking like the enfp
does really does share that tendency to
reflect really deeply to integrate
memories on a really deep level and to
really value the people who we have
those meaningful memories with so if you
want to really take things to the next
level with the enfp in your life try to
do something that feels really
meaningful for both of you together take
a trip with them to somewhere that you
know they've always wanted to go or
learn a new skill with them or find some
other way to spend really meaningful
quality time together that you know they
won't be able to easily forget about
right it's really easy to forget about
the people we go out and party with it's
even really easy to forget about the
people we go out and do kind of benign
activities with when we don't really
make a deep connection while doing those
activities but if you can find a way to
kind of insert yourself into the story
of their lives in a meaningful way
that's really going to motivate the enfp
to continue to engage and deepen their
relationship with you because they now
see you as someone who is almost a part
of themselves not in like a codependent
way i mean it could be in a codependent
way but red flags will hopefully alert
you to that if that's the case but just
in the sense of the people that we love
as enfps we really do see as kind of a
part of who we are and that means we're
always going to be willing to prioritize
those people and to take time for those
people whenever we can and often the
people who we grow to love become the
people we grow to love because we've
shared valuable experiences with them
and we can see that they have been there
through the really pivotal moments in
our lives and i guarantee you that if
you are someone who the enfp reminisces
about who they have really strong really
powerful really connected memories with
you are absolutely inside of their heart
at that point in what capacity i don't
know but you're there you matter to them
and they're probably at that point
already going to be taking proactive
effort to keep you in their life and
last tip for winning over an enfp and
this could potentially negate everything
that came before this point if anything
that came before this point felt
inauthentic to you is be sincere and
authentic enfps can smell inauthenticity
a mile away and it is probably our
single biggest turn off in a person i
would any day of the week 100 of the
time much rather someone come to me and
tell me the thing that they are most
embarrassed about in terms of who they
are as a person then have someone try to
impress me in a way that i know is
inauthentic and fake right someone
trying to act perfect someone trying to
act like they never make any mistakes
someone trying to impress me or show me
something that they think i'm gonna like
fawn over is probably my single greatest
turn off and i think that that goes for
a lot of enfps because when i do surveys
something that comes up again and again
and again is emotional honesty and
authenticity and i cannot back that up
enough like when someone is honest with
me and shares things about themselves to
me that i think it would be difficult
for someone to share like that is such
an attractive quality someone who is
emotionally secure enough to be able to
share the things that they struggle with
and that they're maybe a little bit more
embarrassed about and who doesn't need
to present themselves as like perfect
and flawless that is instantly someone i
want to get to know better like no
questions asked even if i don't like
other aspects of a person's personality
if they show up with authenticity and
honesty and transparency it is just so
endearing so instantly endearing to me
in a way that truly so few other
qualities are so somewhat ironically
after we just spent like half an hour
talking about the traits that you should
try to cultivate and show up with in
relationship to the enfp the number one
thing that's going to get you there
truly is authenticity so even if you are
not a particularly independent person
but you can lead with that and you can
sit down in front of them and go i have
issues with codependency and i am
self-aware and maybe i'm working on it
or whatever it is but you're not trying
to hide that part of yourself or pretend
to be something that you're not
that self-awareness in and of itself is
probably going to be more attractive to
us than anything else self-awareness and
authenticity is i think the number one
thing that enfps are constantly looking
for in any relationship whether it's
romantic platonic or just someone who we
would or would not want to talk to at
the bus stop for five minutes
authenticity is probably the number one
thing and i think that that really goes
for anyone who has introverted feeling
because introverted feeling is a
function that is so focused on
authenticity and that really values
being able to be honest with other
people so if someone comes to us and
they're honest about what's going on
with them it instantly kind of makes us
feel like okay now i can be honest with
this person right like they're not
scared off by authenticity they want to
have those real deep connections and
that is in and of itself usually going
to be enough for us to really want to
get to know that person a lot better
okay i think that i actually did it and
i kept this video to under half an hour
of raw footage so that is a first for me
and i'm very proud of myself but i know
that this list is only five items long
and when i did the surveys there was
like hundreds of responses from enfps
that all had something a little bit
different so leave a note in the
comments letting other people know what
works for you what wins you over as an
enfp or what makes you instantly feel
like you want to be closer to someone
you want to get to know someone better
and if you're an enfp hopefully this
video is just helpful for anyone in your
life who wants to get to know you better
as well alright quick reminder i do run
a six week enfp soul boot camp course
which you can find on my website at
www.heidipreeb.com where we talk about
how to live your most authentic and
aligned life as an enfp you can check it
out at the link below and until next
time i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and i will see you back here again soon
[Music]
you