hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel today I wanted to make a
video about something that is in part
addressing some questions I've gotten so
I've gotten questions around the topic
of how do I stop taking let's say my
partner's Behavior so personally how do
I stop taking rejection personally
essentially how do I stop making other
people's bad behavior about me how do I
not internalize that and I want to use
this video to address that but maybe not
in the most uh straightforward or
conventional way so this is going to be
less of a how-to video it's going to be
more of a reframe so it's going to be
about why we take things personally what
the actual
um kind of deeper or more underlying
motivation might be for our psyches to
want to take things personally and how
we can zoom out and look at how that has
actually been or is adaptive for us and
then make a more conscious choice about
whether we want to continue kind of
processing and interacting with other
people in the world in that way or if
there is a new Better Way Forward for us
so I'm just going to jump in here the
first thing I want to say is that there
can actually be a kind of protective
mechanism in place when we are taking
something personally so let's say
someone is angry at us or someone is
judging us or someone has said something
to us that's unkind or that we are
interpreting is unkind there can
actually be a part of the psyche that
wants to take the things personally and
this is particularly active or tends to
come up more often for people on the
anxious side of the spectrum because
essentially when you are operating from
an anxious attachment wound whether
that's full-blown anxious attachment or
fearful avoidant attachment or at times
you can have avoidant or secure people
feeling into this womb the idea is that
for your own psyche there is no such
thing as bad publicity which means you
will take people loving you but if you
can't be loved you will take someone
being angry at you you will take someone
being frustrated at you you will see any
strong emotion being directed your way
as a means of being in relation with
someone else so there's this song that
came out recently by Lewis Capaldi who
is one of the only people on the planet
who I don't know but would die for and
it's called forget me and the lyrics of
the song are expressing how like he
doesn't mind if his exes still hate him
or are still frustrated with him but the
worst thing he can imagine is that they
just move on and forget all about about
him and feeling different to him and
this is exactly what it feels like to
have an anxious attachment wound it's
that sense of as long as some sort of
strong emotion is being directed towards
me I feel like I haven't disappeared in
the world right I feel like I'm still
being seen and I still matter to someone
even if the attention on me is negative
so when you are in a place where you're
feeling not particularly valued not
particularly connected to people not
particularly seen your psyche might
actually be unconsciously going out of
its way to find things to get offended
by so that you stay in heated connection
with other people whether that is your
partner whether that is strangers on the
internet whether that is your family
members or your friends if you are in
Conflict it means you matter immensely
to someone right so what's really
interesting here is that when you look
at the dynamic maturation model of
attachment which is a kind of
alternative to the traditional model of
attachment it incorporates a lot of John
bolby and Mary ainsworth's work but it
builds upon it and looks at how we grow
and mature alongside our attachment
strategies and one thing that
distinguishes the dynamic maturation
model of attachment from the traditional
attachment model is that the dynamic
maturation model of attachment calls the
attachment Styles strategies so rather
than an overall style that dictates how
you do everything in your attachment
relationships the DMM looks at which
strategies are you employing to keep
people close and so both anxious and
avoidant attachment in the DMM exist on
a spectrum you can be a little bit
anxious or a little bit avoidant or you
can be extremely pervasively anxious or
avoidant and when you get right down to
the bottom of the spectrum where you are
extremely anxiously attached in the DMM
what you actually get is paranoia so
this is the area where pathology begins
to develop and you're likely to have
people start to believe things like
there are people out to get me I am
being watched you might have kind kind
of magical or psychotic thinking when
you get that anxiously attached and the
reason for that is because your psyche
finds it intolerable to conceive of the
idea that you are alone in the world so
if you truly are alone in the world if
all previous attachment strategies have
failed you so you've tried strategy
after strategy after strategy to get
your needs met in healthier ways then
you might eventually if all of those
fail and you're finding yourself alone
give way to paranoia and to deluding
yourself into thinking that you are so
important that people are actually
watching or chasing or stalking you when
actually they're not but that is the
mind's way of coping when it is
intolerable for the mind to believe that
the truth is you just don't matter all
that much to anyone else which I'm not
saying is the case but often when you do
have a situation where someone Falls
that far down the anxious attachment
Spectrum it's because they truly are
being alone neglected whatever else it
is in their lives and that is their
minds last resort to try to keep
themselves feeling connected to other
people is developing false obsessive
relationships in their head so the first
step to not taking things as personally
is recognizing that there might be a
highly adaptive reason why you are
taking things personally
and this doesn't mean that you can't
change that and you can't develop
healthier attaching strategies but it
does go to show that you aren't
necessarily doing this for no reason the
unconscious mind is very intelligent and
it's going to do whatever it feels like
it has to do to get your needs met but
if you would like to stop this we can
move on to step two step two is to make
yourself very aware of the fact that
most other people are only thinking
about how to meet their own needs so I
one time read somewhere the quote
whether someone loves you or hates you
has very little to do with you and I
think that that is so true and so apt
for what we're talking about today but
here's the problem if we're going to
accept that most of what people hate or
take issue with in relation to us has a
lot more to do with them than with us we
also have to accept that most of the
things people love and admire in us have
much less to do with us than it does to
do with them so this is often a game we
actually don't want to take ourselves
out of because if we have the belief
that other people liking respecting
admiring validating us means that we are
good and worthy we necessarily have to
believe the opposite to also be true
which is that when people don't like us
or feel angry at us or are expressing
displeasure towards us and something
we've done it means that we are unworthy
the only way to do away with this whole
thing is to opt out of the underlying
belief systems that our worthiness or
our sense of being good enough is
dependent on how other people think of
us the opposite of this belief system is
to recognize that other people are just
existing in the world looking for
mirrors right often what people hate in
US is what they hate about themselves
that they have not integrated so if
someone has this rule for themselves
let's say I must always be perfectly
emotionally regulated at all times or
else I'm not worthy of Love they are
going to hate it when they see anyone
else being disregulated and getting
support because that is breaking the
unconscious rule they have for
themselves and so instead of looking
internally and going okay how do I
integrate the part of myself that is
sometimes disregulated and needs support
and allow myself to be loved in that way
they're going to go on a crusade trying
to get everyone else to stop being
dysregulated so that their Fair World
hypothesis checks out right if I have a
rule for myself and this is how it works
for me it must be this way for everybody
else that's like the birthplace of all
self-righteousness right but when we're
able to recognize that a lot of what
people take issue with in US is actually
just them experiencing an inner conflict
then it gets so easy to be like oh wait
a minute this person might be putting me
down they might have said something that
hurt my feelings they might be showing
up in a way that I find a little bit
offensive or like I don't like it but
it's actually just them externalizing
their inner conflict that how helps us
take things less personally however it
also means that when someone is admiring
us or when someone is flooding us with
love and appreciation and just write up
our asses for lack of a better term that
also doesn't have that much to do with
us that is usually someone projecting
some aspect of what they like about
themselves onto us that's an inner
conflict that they are trying to resolve
through over identifying with someone
outside of themselves and all the
magical made-up traits that they are
likely projecting onto Us in the process
so this is not to say that all human
communication is bogus and has nothing
to do with real connection but I think
that true connection always comes from a
place of both people being integrated
and embodied in their own experience and
then sharing those experiences with each
other without needing to believe other
things about each other other than what
is being shared and the more we can be
aware of how much we are doing that
right how am I projecting on to other
people where am I getting frustrated
with people because I perceive them as
breaking a rule that I made for myself
right an example of this might be let's
say you have the internalized belief
that in order for you to have close
connected relationships you constantly
have to do things for other people you
constantly have to do favors to
anticipate other people's needs to show
up and offer support for other people
you might get really mad if you see
people getting love and appreciation
without doing those things because that
is a rule you've internalized for
yourself so becoming aware of all of
these ways we internalize rules and
project anger and jealousy onto people
who do not follow our rules but still
get what we want helps us to realize
that the same is chronically happening
in the other direction and that much of
what other people don't like about us is
actually just them struggling with some
sort of inner conflict that their
interaction with us is making them more
aware of and that they are unconsciously
and somewhat foolishly trying to work
out through interacting with us rather
than through of self-reflection so if
you want to make things easier on
yourself I recommend moving to step
number three which is ask for
clarification when you are feeling
offended and I want to be clear here
that I'm not saying ask for
clarification in a kind of anxious get
your feelings of anxiety soothed
externally way what I mean is asking for
clarification about where that person
was authentically coming from with what
they said was there a misunderstanding
that happened is there something you're
missing about how this situation doesn't
have all that much to do with you
so this kind of reminds me of the years
and years that I spent writing articles
on the internet for a living for a
period of a couple years I worked as a
staff writer for an online publication
and I would write on average three
articles a day and over those years I
got like thousands of comments on my
stuff right and the more I read the
comments and analyzed them both the very
excited happy loving ones and the
Furious angry dissatisfied ones I
learned that almost every single comment
I've ever gotten in my life boils down
to one of two sentiments sentiment one
is I see myself in this thing and I like
it sentiment two is I see myself in this
thing and I don't like it often when
people Express anger or dissatisfaction
or are in some way not happy with us
it's actually because some part of them
feels misunderstood or misrepresented or
unacknowledged through the interaction
with us and if we can get to the root of
what that thing is for the other person
almost all of the time we will learn
that it's not personal at all usually it
takes about three pointed and
intentional questions to get to the root
of what the person's actual issue or
complaint is and in my experience
someone's actual issue or complaint as
long as they are let's say self-aware
and vulnerable enough to be able to
articulate it eventually is not at all
in the ballpark of what we thought it
was so one of the most powerful
questions I think we can ask in any
interaction where we're feeling offended
upset like we are in kind of a hostile
environment with someone else is the
question what am I missing
right it seems like there's something
here we aren't seeing eye to eye on and
I feel like I don't have the whole
picture is there anything you think
based on what I've said that I am
missing I'm really committing to getting
that question answered for yourself is
almost always going to make the
situation feel a lot less personal
because what you're missing very rarely
actually has to do with you even if the
other person is coming at you with a lot
of let's say stories about how they
think your character is even if they are
coming at you with a whole bunch of
insults and I don't necessarily
recommend that you sit through
conversations like this right if someone
can't speak respectfully to you it's
usually time to hang up the phone go no
contact whatever it is but if there's
still respect present in the
conversation just try asking what am I
missing I'm noticing myself getting a
little activated or feeling a little
offended and I think I might be missing
something in this interaction or
misunderstanding something you're saying
would you be willing to expand a little
bit on blank being able to say that
sentence will save you immense grief if
you are able to humble yourself enough
when you're feeling offended to say it
so for myself that's sometimes what I
like to do just literally identify a
name I'm feeling offended communicate
that to the other person then give the
benefit of the doubt let them know I
think there might be something I'm
missing or misunderstanding and give
them the opportunity to clarify their
position if they truly are attacking you
and just trying to be an you
will find out very quickly because when
you say that sentence they will come
back with more assholery but if you
actually are missing or misunderstanding
something you've now opened the door to
figuring out what's actually going on in
this interaction right and that is a
door that if you open it will get you
much closer to that place where you are
not feeling chronically activated and
offended step number four for not taking
things so personally is get really clear
about what your own triggers are so a
lot of the time we get offended in
similar situations right like for myself
I have a really big trigger around
people thinking they know me better than
they do I get really activated and kind
of defensive and on guard if someone
makes an assumption about my life that
is either inaccurate or incomplete or
that I imagine they don't have the full
story around I get activated in my body
even talking about it I can feel it
right now but it took me a lot of
different situations that that happened
within for me to recognize that that's a
trigger that comes up for me so this
work starts with awareness right with
being willing to recognize situations in
which you're offended as kind of like an
x marks the spot over a trigger response
that you have right so pairing the
thought I'm triggered I'm offended I
feel defensive with the thought let's
figure out what's going on here there's
an X marking this spot let's dig here
now this does not mean accepting that
you are being completely crazy or
irrational every time you feel offended
or defensive right it's very possible
that someone truly did say something
unkind or inconsiderate towards you
however you might be having a 10 out of
10 reaction to a 4 out of 10 situation
because you have a trigger that comes
alive in that situation so your job is
to figure out what it is that's taking
this thing from a four to a ten it is
your time to ask yourself what am I
missing right I feel offended I
recognize this situation is probably not
as hostile as I feel like it is so what
am I missing when in the past have I had
situations where let's say someone
giving me unsolicited advice or being
overly familiar with me has actually
been dangerous or a big threat to me and
can I recognize and hold space for the
fact that when that happens in my
day-to-day life now I get very activated
and I tend to make the situation I'm
facing seem bigger and more threatening
in my mind and body than it actually is
now learning to down regulate from
triggers learning to deal effectively
with triggers is an entire skill set in
and of itself that we're not going to go
through in this video but that first
step is having awareness around when
they're happening so is this truly a
situation where anybody would feel a 10
out of 10 offended response to this or
is this a situation where some old
wounding is coming up and I'm reacting
to that alongside the situation this is
going to help us gain some perspective
at the least when we're feeling very
activated now step number five or kind
of reframe number five is recognizing
that just like other people tend to
project onto others and work their
internal conflicts out externally we
often feel offended as a means of
avoiding our own inner triggers as well
right if I can get really mad at someone
else for the way that they're showing up
in the world and the way that I want
them to be communicating differently
with me then I don't have to take any
responsibility for what that brings up
inside of myself and a really good
example of this is I see people like
fixating obsessively on let's say their
partner's Behavior or their ex's
Behavior or their friend or their family
members disrespect and yes it is good
and healthy to be able to recognize
disrespect however then our job if we
are recognizing true disrespect is to
respect ourselves enough to disconnect
from the situation right to go I'm not
fine with you talking to me that way or
treating me that way I'm going to draw a
boundary here but often when what we do
instead is get really fixated on trying
to change someone else's Behavior or
change the way that they're speaking to
us or showing up towards us it's because
we're trying to resolve some internal
conflict externally so I had a situation
one time where I was super fixed stated
on not liking the tone that this person
would take with me I thought they were
condescending I thought that they were
rude I had all of these judgments about
this person and I was so fixated on it
like I could not let it go I felt
desperate to get this person to change
the way they talk to me and other people
and I realized after a while of being
very internally angsty about that that
actually I saw a lot of traits in that
person that I also saw in myself
when I was triggered when I was
activated I also had a tendency to mount
a moral high horse and talk down to
people and be unaccepting of other
people's point of view and be rigid in
the way that I thought and I was so
frustrated and caught up with my
frustration at this other because they
were displaying behavior that I knew I
had not fully acknowledged in myself and
that I had not done repair work
interpersonally around in situations
where I had shown up in that way and as
soon as I was able to recognize that it
was like my anger this other person just
evaporated because it wasn't about them
and it was never about them right people
have the right within the realm of
things that are legal to show up in
whatever way they're going to show up in
the world but when we are chronically
obsessive about the ways we want other
people to be different it's often
because we're seeing some aspect of
ourselves mirrored back to us in that
other either we want to change them so
we don't have to change ourselves or
we're avoiding some sort of
vulnerability inside of ourselves right
deciding that this person hates us and
that everything they do is about us and
that they're out to get us might feel a
lot more soothing and comforting than
realizing that we're actually not that
important to them
and actually they're out for themselves
and they are not thinking that much
about us they are not waking up in the
morning thinking about how to make our
day miserable they're just thinking
about how to meet their own needs and
actually we're responsible for meeting
ours but if we find that thought
threatening and we don't want to
acknowledge that it's really adaptive to
spend all of our time deciding that
everybody else's behavior is about us
right so if the goal is to take things
less personally there has to be a kind
of reframing around the way that we
think of other people's communication
with us even if someone is being truly
terrible and abusive and unkind to us it
probably doesn't have that much to do
with us it is our job to just set some
boundaries get that person away from our
inner child and then find people who are
more respectful to interact with however
anytime we want to stay engaged in this
Psycho Drama anytime we find ourselves
obsessively ruminating about something
that we're taking super personally it's
probably because we're getting something
out of that rumination and that there's
something more vulnerable underneath
that actually needs a dressing inside of
us usually some sort of feeling of
loneliness unworthiness being unseen or
not cared about by anybody and if we can
address those feelings and learn to find
Connections in healthy fulfilling ways
and build towards that type of life it
gets a lot easier to not take things
personally but doing this requires an
incredible amount of self-honesty
alright that's all I have to say for
today on the topic of taking things less
personally I feel in my bones that this
video might have a follow-up video with
more kind of Hands-On advice at some
point in the future but for now let me
know in the comments where you guys are
at in this process if you tend to err on
the side of taking things super
personally or maybe on the other side of
not taking things personally enough and
not showing up and fighting the battles
that you ought to be fighting any
thoughts Reflections comments questions
leave them below I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again super soon
[Music]