hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we talk
a lot about how to get more of what we
want out of our lives and less of what
we don't want and in this video I want
to talk about a particular phenomenon
which is the feeling of being unable to
let go of a relationship that in reality
has probably already ended so this
question comes in a lot of different
forms how do I let go how do I move on
how do I get over my ex or someone else
who's been significant to me and the way
that I tend to translate this question
in a lot of those cases is into the
sentence how do I let go of my
attachment to somebody because in a lot
of cases when this question is getting
asked it's getting asked by somebody who
is already in reality effectively ended
their relationship with the person in
question or who's pretty clear on the
fact that that is the move they want or
that they think would be the best to
make so in this video we're going to
talk about how it feels to be securely
attached and to move on from
relationships and why it's so different
for those who are more insecure or who
have some sort of developmental or
relational wounding that comes online
that might cause feelings of attachment
to persist even in situations where what
you really want is to move on from that
attachment and find yourself in a new
phase so the fundamental question here
for me is how are some people so able to
move past relationships While others are
not so how do people who are securely
attached let's say manage to stay
friends with ex-partners even after
attachment wounds have happened how do
people stop ruminating and holding on to
what was once good while other people
stay really stuck in these patterns of
anger and sadness and blame when a
relationship ends and the first step of
kind of understanding this is that when
a secure person moves on from let's say
a romantic relationship or some other
form of attachment relationship what
they're moving on from is the attachment
itself so that idea of who that person
is going to be in their life and what
role they're going to play in their
lives and when they're able to kind of
take people out of that category in
their minds out of the category of
attachment figure it's pretty easy and
natural to let the relationship
transition into whatever makes the most
sense so for secure people if something
didn't work out romantically maybe after
some time there's still room in your
life for a friend and that person could
fill that role or an acquaintance or
whatever it is attachment figures are
people who we go to for co-regulation so
for consistent mirroring as well as to
an extent to have our needs for Comfort
safety and support met when someone is
secure if they notice that those needs
are no longer getting met through an
attachment relationship provided they're
an adult at this point generally those
feelings of attachment start to
naturally fade of course this might
happen after they have first tried to
revive the relationship a few times and
it might be a process that involves a
lot of pain and brief but their feelings
change as a reflection of the reality
that they are being faced with now in
contrast to this if you have an insecure
attachment system often what happens if
your needs are not getting met in
reality you might start naturally
without even noticing this is happening
slip into a fantasy world where your
needs are getting met through your
relationship if not at this point in
time maybe some point in the future so
you're imagining a year down the road or
five years down the road when things are
going to be different and you start
co-regulating with that fantasy instead
of with reality and this is often how we
end up in these sticky situations where
the relationship we have in reality is a
mess but we still feel deeply attached
to it because what's actually happening
is that we've gotten really attached to
the fantasy we have about things turning
around or about our partner changing and
becoming different or maybe about
ourselves changing and becoming
different and winning back a perfect
relationship which usually never existed
in reality because even the most secure
relationships are very far from perfect
but in order to happily co-regulate with
that fantasy we need the other person to
be in our lives or else the fantasy
starts feeling really unrealistic so in
this video most of what we're going to
talk about is how to re-center into
reality notice what's actually happening
in your life and in your relationships
and how to make sure that you are
staying in that place of reality rather
than slipping away into a fantasy where
the internal representation of someone
that you have in your mind is in fact
quite different from the reality of the
relationship that you have with them
because that's the only real answer when
it comes to how to get over someone or
how to move on from them or how to let
go of your attachment to them you need
to engage with reality and notice what
is actually there between you versus
what is already gone or maybe what was
never actually there in the first place
so because I am myself you know that I
had to make this a five-step process
step number one in the process is
separating out your attachment to this
person in reality from the story that
you have about your attachment to this
person that you use to regulate yourself
chances are if you have this conscious
drive and intention to become less
attached to this person it's because
some part of you knows that in reality
things are not working out but maybe you
have this story in your head of how you
could turn things around or how the
relationship is going to get a lot
better in the next two to five years or
about how if you leave you are never
going to be able to get over them or
you're never going to be able to find
someone else whatever it is you might
have all of these stories swirling
around you that convince you to just
stay where you are even though where you
are might be somewhere where you're
really unhappy and things are not
working out for you and so step one is
to as much as humanly possible notice
when you're in a story notice what
you're feeling when you're actually
sitting across from this person when
you're actually spending time with them
versus how you feel when you're alone
panicking at the thought of losing them
whatever you're picturing when you
picture losing them is a story you don't
know what it's going to feel like or
what's going to be happening in your
life when you lose them until you get
there you also couldn't possibly know
what the future could hold with this
person until you get there the only real
information you have about your
connection to another person is the way
that you feel when you are around them
and Associated to reality in their
presence in real time so Step One is
becoming increasingly aware of that how
do I feel around this person when I am
with them and there can be kind of
tricky things that come up here right
maybe you feel phenomenal around this
person half of the time but the other
half of the time you feel really
neglected and you feel kind of put down
or rejected by this person that's also
information right I feel inconsistently
good around this person is a very
different sentence than I feel good
around them because when a very high
level of inconsistency is present it
usually means that even the good times
come along with an undercurrent of
anxiety or even intense relief which
again is just worth noting now when we
grow up insecurely attached we can't
really just tell our brains to stop
making stories about things our brains
have learned to regulate with stories
about hopes for the future for as long
as we have been alive but what we can do
is become as conscious as possible about
when we are in Story versus when we are
actually sitting in front of the person
and noticing the difference between
those two things if most of the time
that I feel happy in my relationship is
actually when the person isn't around me
and when I'm fantasizing about how
different things could be later or how
good things were at the beginning that's
a really key indication that something
might be a miss with the relationship we
have in reality versus if most of the
time I feel really good around this
person in reality and I don't find it
difficult to stay Associated and on the
same page as them when we're together
that's probably a pretty good sign that
the attachment is reasonably healthy but
I'm guessing if that's the case you
probably didn't click on this video so
let's move on to step number two step
number two to letting go of your
attachment to someone is to stop trying
to control the outcome instead start
telling the truth in a self-responsible
way inside of your relationship and just
notice what happens in your relationship
as a natural consequence of that so this
is the art of letting your life auto
correct around the truth so I want to be
clear here the truth is not a story that
you have around the other person it's
not you are manipulative and a liar
right the truth is something like oh I
felt a bit of anxiety coming up in my
body when you made that promise to me I
have these memories coming up of times
you made similar promises in the past
and how it felt when they weren't
followed through on and so I'm noticing
in this moment I'm having a sense of
anxiety and kind of discontent like I
don't know where to put my feelings down
in a place where I can trust that
they'll be safe maybe telling the truth
is I don't feel close to you and I don't
know why and I really want to and I feel
some sadness about the kind of distance
that it feels like is present for me in
our connection or I felt a lot of anger
over the way that you spoke to me the
last time we were together and I noticed
that standing here in front of you now
that anger's still pretty active and
alive in me and it's making it difficult
for me to feel connected to you when we
start telling the truth in our
connections which is not easy work right
this is a high level secure attachment
skill but the more we can do it the more
we naturally start to bump into the
limitations and boundaries of our
connections if we are never testing to
see what the other person would do in
response to us sharing what's true for
us it's really easy to just dissociate
into a fantasy where they always say and
do the right thing but if we start
actually reality testing that and
showing up as the people we actually are
with the feelings and thoughts that we
actually have inside of our
relationships then we start to very
quickly get the picture of what happens
when we bring those things in maybe we
share a difficult feeling and the other
person instinctively kind of dissociates
or zones out maybe we share something
about our anger or our vulnerability and
they come back immediately with the
defensive insult to our character maybe
we show something very raw and very
vulnerable about ourselves to someone
else and we get rejected and the natural
kind of protests that a lot of us have
at this point thinking about behaving
this way in our relationships is wait
but I'm gonna get hurt right that's
going to be so painful if I'm showing
people my honest feelings not knowing
how they're going to respond to them
especially in a relationship that
already feels like it's falling apart
and unfortunately the authentic response
to that is yes it is highly likely that
it's going to hurt immensely to start
showing up honestly inside of a
relationship that that has already
fallen ill in some capacity hitting the
realistic limits of a relationship that
we have already formed in attachment to
is extraordinarily painful
breaking and attachment is
extraordinarily painful so I'm not here
to tell you how to go through this
process without experiencing pain
because it's not possible to do that the
pain of a broken attachment is the very
thing that allows you to recognize on an
emotional level that it's not working
and allows you to finally move on from
it so I think that a good 90 plus
percent of the time when people are
really stuck on how do I move on how do
I let go how do I let an attachment
become a part of my past the question
they are actually asking is how do I do
that without experiencing deep pain and
the answer is you cannot do that without
experiencing deep pain
to show up to our lives as they actually
are in reality at a point in time where
what's happening in reality is that some
sort of loving attachment relationship
we have created is ending is if our
emotional systems are working anywhere
close to the way that they should be one
of the most painful experiences we can
go through so again this video is about
how to go through it it's not about how
to bypass it and get to a point where
our lives are different without us
having to have felt the pain if you are
noticing what is happening rather than
running away with your stories about how
you can change things or about how this
doesn't matter and you don't have to
feel sad because you're so much better
than them and you're only just realizing
it now if you can stay in reality and
notice the loss as it's happening you
are giving yourself the best chance
possible at actually starting to move on
from that thing in a healthy way which
brings us to step number three step
three is feel the pain of disconnection
and loss without savioring yourself from
that pain so there are a lot of things
that most of us do when we start to
realize oh this relationship or this
thing that I want in my life is slipping
through my fingers we might create an
angry story about how we don't care
right we might decide that that person
was never any good and that actually
we're so much better than them and we're
so much better off without them and we
don't need them anyway
and what does that angry story allow us
to do it allows us to temporarily
disconnect but it's not entirely based
in reality if you loved this person
enough to form a connection with them in
real life it's highly likely that they
are not all bad and the moment you
remember the moment that kind of anger
leaves your system just enough for those
memories of the good parts to creep back
in it's going to be really easy to go
immediately back because usually what
we're doing when we're telling ourselves
an angry story about someone is just
keeping ourselves connected to them in a
different way savioring ourselves from
the pain might look like going
immediately into a different
relationship and telling ourselves this
person is nothing like the last person
they're way better and so now I'm
completely happy and once again the
moment that starts to crumble and we
start to see the ways in which this new
person is actually far inferior to
co-regulating with us in certain ways
that our ex-partner was once again it's
going to start looking really attractive
to go back into that old connection
either in reality or inside of our own
minds anything we are doing whether that
means moving on with another person
whether that means turning to drugs and
alcohol and partying for six months
after a relationship ends whether that
means throwing ourselves into work and
trying to forget about it whether that
means telling ourselves angry victimized
stories about the other person whether
that means getting obsessed with some
sort of Revenge plot to get back at them
anything we are doing to disconnect from
the direct experience of emotional pain
that we feel at an attachment ending is
a way of keeping our fake attachment
going and what we're trying to do here
is sync up our real and our internal
representation of our attachment so if
it's over in reality we want to find a
way to sit and be present with the pain
of it being over in reality the moments
when we miss them we want to stay
present for and really notice that
feeling of them being absent from our
lives notice what it feels like in your
body when you hit one of those moments
sometimes I just say out loud the
physical Sensations that are present for
me to make them feel more real
for myself sadness almost feels like
this sense of water rushing downwards
and out through my body like all of the
energy in me is suddenly subject to an
extreme gravitational pull downwards but
for everyone it's different if you can
stay curious inside of those moments
when they arise for you when you're
feeling that sense of loss of pain of
grief of disconnection what you're doing
in those moments is now syncing up your
real relationship and your fantasy
relationship if the real relationship is
ending if your ability to truly make
each other happy and co-regulate and
protect each other throughout life and
build a future together is no longer
present it going to feel painful and
you're going to need to notice and give
credit to those moments of pain when
they arise and they will arise
frequently and what the mind and the
body is going to want to do is to jump
to anything to get rid of those feelings
and this can include a sad tragic
victimized story that makes the pain
worse so you have to watch out for that
as well because if you can convince
yourself that the pain is so big and so
humongous and so overwhelming that you
need them to come back because you
couldn't possibly deal with this pain
now you're right back in that fantasy
attachment world my favorite Mantra to
do in really emotionally difficult
moments is I'm feeling X Y or Z here's
what I notice is happening in my body
and I'm surviving it and that part is
really important
I'm experiencing a moment of grief I
feel like the life is getting drained
out of my body and there's not enough
energy left in me to lift a single
finger
and I'm surviving this is how as adults
we slowly train ourselves to deal with
the existential pains that we weren't
able to cope with as children and that
we didn't have adequate Comfort or
protection around so instead we
developed insecure attachment patterns
and or elaborate distraction techniques
and fantasy worlds so this is the
process of getting back in touch with
our direct real-time experience of being
alive noticing and welcoming in the pain
because the pain is the thing that is
aligning us to reality and that
alignment with reality is going to be
the thing that eventually allows us to
properly let go of a relationship that's
no longer working and move on it's kind
of like how food goes sour right it's a
good thing to be able to smell the foul
odor coming out of your food when it's
gone bad because it protects you from
continuing to eat it so if you're
plugging your nose every time you go to
eat a meal you might not notice when the
food that you have is is spoiled and
then you're going to be continuously
making yourself sick without
understanding why and the same is true
when we cover up reality with a fantasy
we might end up continuously engaging in
the same situations that are making us
sick without having an awareness of why
emotional pain is like the foul scent
rising up from the cheese that you've
left in the fridge for too long it's not
pleasant to experience it but it's there
to tell you something about how to stop
accidentally poisoning yourself one of
the simplest but most profound sentences
you can learn to repeat to yourself when
you find yourself moving through this
process is I am in pain and the reason
I'm in pain is because this relationship
is not working it centers you in the
reality of what is happening it
acknowledges the truth of your
experience and it prevents you from
going into this fantasy world I am in
pain and I'm in pain because I am losing
something I care about and that I once
loved deeply whatever it is that
resonates for you find that sentence
that aligns you to reality in those
moments of pain and don't allow your
mind to savior you from that Pain by
disconnecting from it and going into
some fantasy or story stay as present as
you possibly can it's terrible in the
short term and in the long term it pays
off immensely which leads us to step
number four if you've gotten to this
point in the process where you're
looking at reality and recognizing what
isn't working and maybe you've even let
this relationship go already in reality
now your job is to just allow your life
to have a void in it for a while you
cannot move on from anything that you
have once loved and considered a part of
yourself without moving through the void
of that thing's absence otherwise all
you're going to be doing is trying to
recreate the past in the present and
some people do spend their entire lives
doing this right a relationship ends and
you go that's fine I can just go
immediately into the next one and get
everything that I need from that one and
then one day six months from now you
wake up and look at your partner and
inside of your mind hate them for all of
the ways in which they're not your past
partner yeah they're not the point of
the Void was to absorb and help you
integrate all of the parts of the person
you once loved that you want to carry
forward with you as a part of yourself
and in order to get to that place where
you're able to integrate that you have
to first let the void alert you to the
ways in which you really miss that
person
and the ways in which their absence has
a really strong impact on your life it
hurts in the void it's not fun to be
there so don't expect this to feel good
right just expect it to be deeply useful
and growing in the long term so I
remember there was a point in my life
where there is someone who is deeply
important to me who had recently left my
life and a big part of the way in which
that person had been important to me was
that they had served as a very strong
feminine force in my life they were very
nurturing and they sat with me in a lot
of my sadness and they helped me see
kind of the softer more beautiful side
of the world when I was coming at it
from a harsher place and they helped me
nurture a lot of the feminine qualities
in myself that I neglected for the
majority of my life
and I remember one day after they'd left
my life walking past a department store
and getting hit with this intense scent
of perfume and I got so viscerally sad
in like an instant and I remember later
that week talking to my therapist about
it and telling him I just feel like any
time I see something kind of beautiful
and feminine and soft I just miss this
person and that presence that they had
in my life so badly and he went okay so
you haven't yet integrated the thing
that they were giving you because what
that person gave you wasn't just the
direct influence that they had they
showed you something about what you
could allow into your life so in my case
for a long time I had been shutting out
my relationship to the feminine and The
Feminine qualities that existed inside
of me and around this person I gave
myself permission for those things to
matter and be valuable and I could still
give myself that same permission now
that they were gone I was just going to
have to learn to integrate their impact
and start embodying it instead of seeing
that experience as intrinsically
connected to that person and when it
comes down to it that's a lot of what
love is right it's the feeling of
learning things through another person
of being exposed to new ways of
understanding the world and ourselves
and other people and in a lot of ways
our identities do kind of merge with
other people now this can happen to a
wildly unhealthy extent of course but
insecure relationships that is somewhat
normal there is this process of I take
on elements of you and you take on
elements of me and we construct this
kind of shared identity of the way that
we understand the world through each
other's eyes
and when our attachment to a person ends
when their literal role in our life
comes to a close then it's up to us to
figure out what parts of that shared
reality that existed between us do I
want to reintegrate and allow to become
a pervasive part of my identity without
always having to think of it as a direct
reflection of that other of course
there's always going to be highly
specific things that remind us of other
people but for the most part when we
have integrated a loss what it means is
that we have picked up all the pieces of
what that person brought into our life
and we've chosen which ones we want to
leave behind versus which ones we want
to allow to become a permanent part of
us and so spending time in that void
with our eyes open means conceding to
the fact that for a while we are going
to be painfully aware of this person's
absence and our life can go on in the
process we can go to work feeling a
little bit sad and noticing the points
when we'd like to be able to reach shout
and text them or tell them a joke that
only they would understand we can go to
social engagements and feel a little bit
sad and resigned and like we don't
really want to get to know anyone else
we can cook meals for ourselves feeling
sad we can fall asleep at night hugging
a body pillow that we wish were someone
else and we can trust in the process
that this experience of moving through
that void of someone's absence and
noticing and staying Associated to it
can and will absorb the loss you get to
decide inside of the Void what you keep
with you as you move forward in life and
what you leave behind and that is an
incredibly powerful position for you to
be in but the only way to get there is
for us to actually stay present with the
pain if we dissociate from it if we try
to save ourselves from it if we try to
fall in love with someone else to get it
to go away we are robbing ourselves of
this immense incredible growth
opportunity moving through the void
changes you on a fun fundamental level
and you will know that you are on the
other side of the Void when you feel
changed when you don't feel like you
need to go back to that other person or
that past connection either in reality
or inside of your own mind in order to
get the wonderful benefit of having had
it if you met that person at a point in
your life when you were extremely
depressed and they made you feel really
happy you will know that you have moved
through the void of their absence when
you have felt the pain of that loss and
integrated the fact that you need a life
full of joy and laughter so you've gone
out and found it in other places and now
thinking back on that person you don't
need them back in your life in order to
feel that sense of joy and vitality
you've found a way to integrate that
need and get it filled in another way
maybe there is a structure that that
person added to your life or a sense of
responsibility that you find it
difficult to hold on your own you'll
know that you've moved through that void
when you get to the other side of it and
recognize that actually you've gotten
pretty good at managing your own life
and staying responsible so thinking back
to that past person you might have fond
memories of them but you no longer need
them to come in and help you organize
yourself you've integrated that maybe
there is something really comforting and
soothing about this person and you'll
know that you're on the other side of
that void when you finally learned how
to comfort and soothe yourself or how to
design a life where your grief and your
pain is more readily absorbed through
community and through self-care so you
don't need any one person to be the only
one who sees your pain and helps you
work through it you'll know that you
have arrived on the other side of the
Void when you look at your life and know
without a shadow of a doubt that you are
a different person than you were when
you met that person who you got so
attached to that while you may still
value them immensely as a human being
and hope for the best for them you no
longer need them to fill the attachment
role in your life life because you've
integrated the parts of that
relationship that were once invaluable
to you and you're now able to show up
for yourself in that way so there's no
risk of backsliding but this period
where the loss feels so raw and so clear
and so confronting in a lot of ways is a
necessary component of recognizing what
needs to get integrated in order for you
to move on this is the period of just
living inside of the reality of loss
which can include really beautiful
moments I would say some of the most
profound and exquisite moments of my
entire life have happened inside of
periods of deep loss because if you let
it loss really wakes you up to the
present moment it makes you hyper aware
of what you have that you usually take
for granted
so living in the void is this experience
of deep pain but it's also potentially
this experience of deep gratitude and
deep growth and deep connection with
other people trying to speed our way out
of the Void means to Rob ourselves of
some of the most human moments of Our
Lives because again this is our chance
to prove to ourselves I am now old
enough and wise enough and capable
enough to cope with the losses that my
childhood self could not cope with and
if you can truly teach yourself to do
this well you will gain in a measurable
amount of self trust which leads us to
the fifth and final step which we've
already kind of covered in Step number
four integrate the love and the care and
the connection that you had with this
other until you become this kind of
beautiful Mosaic of yourself and your
past relationships and let that be the
new version of you going forward so I
remember reading the book I believe it
was upheaval by Jared Diamond who is a
very brilliant geographer and historian
and he was talking about why certain
Nations recover from crisis points and
others do not and he was using the
nation of Japan as an example of a
culture that had at one point in history
done a really beautiful job of
assimilating its traditional cultural
values with new ones that had come into
play during a crisis point and he
describes Japan as this beautiful Mosaic
of what has been as well as what is and
that struck me as such a beautiful
metaphor for moving through any period
of personal loss or change it's not how
do I get rid of the old completely and
it's also not how do I hold desperately
onto it without letting anything change
it's how do I use what I took from the
past and weave it through the present in
order to arrive at a period of my life
where the past and the present are now
this beautiful new tapestry that looks
and will always look different than what
it was and this wove so beautifully in
for me to this lecture that I remember
attending when I was doing my master's
degree in attachment Theory where we
were watching this video of Patricia
Crittenden who was the founder of the
dynamic maturational model of attachment
talking about how it takes an average of
three years to really move on from
someone who's been a deep significant
attachment figure to us so this might be
apparent to someone we were married to
or had a very intertwined long-term
relationship with but what I really
loved about what she was saying was that
she defined what it means to move on
from someone she said three years is
approximately and this doesn't mean it's
this way for everyone but this is the
average the period of time that it takes
to move from a place where our identity
and the way that we think about
ourselves is significantly intertwined
with this other to a place where our
identity feels like it is all ours again
and regardless of what period of time
this takes for a given person I think
that it's beautiful to have that as a
reference point for what it means to
move on and let go of an attachment to
somebody how much of me do I feel like
still belongs to this other and for some
of us we can stay stuck for the entirety
of our lives in that place right we can
be 75 years old thinking about someone
we knew in our 20s and still feeling
like a part of ourselves was left behind
in that relationship but it's never too
late to reclaim those things decide that
if they've stuck with us for that long
there must be something that we need
from that and learn to embody and
integrate it into our personal identity
so it no longer feels tied to that other
and when we have hit that point when we
have let go of our fantasy relationship
with this other people being the place
where we go to have all of these needs
met our needs for love care self-esteem
sexual attraction nurturing whatever it
is it could truly be anything and we
learn to be present enough with the loss
to figure out which parts of that loss
we want to take with us and integrate
into our understanding of ourselves to
create that new tapestry that's how we
know that we are finally doing that work
of deeply moving on and healing from a
past attachment all right that's all I
have to say for today on this topic as
always let me know what's coming up for
you guys in the comments as you go
through this video I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and your inner children
and I will see you back here again
really soon
foreign
[Music]