hey guys heidi preeve here today i'm
hopping on to a dress a comment that i
see repeatedly in attachment communities
attachment groups in the comments
section on attachment videos that i also
used to wholeheartedly fear and believe
and this belief is the belief that
secure attachment means being bored
forever and i want to first of all
acknowledge that this is a totally
normal fear to have particularly if
you're coming from the anxious or
fearful avoidant side of the attachment
spectrum and here's why
so i want you to imagine that you had
been born with a chronic low-grade dull
headache that never leaves your
awareness okay so from the time you have
been alive imagine if you have not ever
known what it feels like to just wake up
in the morning and not have a headache
if this were the case you would start
getting really hype on things like advil
you might discover there are certain
things that temporarily makes this dull
pain exit my awareness and when that
dull pain is not in my awareness it
feels so good that it's almost euphoric
right the moments where you were not
experiencing that headache that has been
following you around your entire life
would start to feel sublime because they
were so different than the way that you
normally feel and you would probably
start getting a little bit obsessed with
advil because you would think advil is
the best feeling a person can have when
you pop an advil nothing is better than
that but actually the best feeling you
could experience is the lack of a
headache but you don't know how to
differentiate that so you start to fall
in love with whatever it is that gives
you relief from that headache and this
is exactly what it's like to have an
anxious component to your attachment
style where you chronically and
consistently have believed since the
time you were able to have conscious
thoughts that there is something wrong
with you that you're not good enough
that you are not worth being loved and
so now anything that provides you with
temporary relief from that feeling you
perceive to be so overwhelmingly
positive that it borders on euphoria and
you might become very afraid that
healing your attachment style would mean
losing that euphoria but in reality what
healing your attachment style means is
getting rid of that underlying sense of
self-hatred that has been following you
through your entire life and it's that
very sense of self-hatred that makes any
relief from it feels so euphoric in the
first place when you do not have a sense
of what having an internal sense of
security and self-love and
self-acceptance would feel like it's
really hard to imagine what life would
look like from that perspective right
it's kind of like i'm gonna launch
immediately into another metaphor let's
say you've just been hungry your whole
life you have chronically not had enough
food to eat you would start getting
obsessed with food and you would think
in your head like food is the best
experience a person could possibly have
you'd start salivating over all of these
foods and you'd be like okay i don't
want to lose my hunger because if i
weren't hungry anymore food would stop
tasting as good and then why would i
wake up in the mornings but you don't
realize in that case that when you are
properly full when you feel like you are
satisfied and you've had enough to eat
your mind starts working better and it
starts thinking about other things now
if you've had a full hearty meal you're
able to think about work projects you
want to pursue you're able to think
creatively about things in your life
you're able to have calm connected
conversations with people where you
aren't just overridden with the thought
of i'm hungry i'm hungry i'm hungry the
whole time right so you're able to
actually show up in a calm regulated way
and you are able to foster deeper
connections create new opportunities for
your future think about things in a
creative and deep way that you were not
able to previously think about things
because you were so preoccupied with
your own need there is a reason why we
call it anxious preoccupation because
you are literally flooded preoccupied
with thoughts about getting rid of that
sense of self-hatred and that is not
conscious all of the time most of what
it feels like is you fantasizing about
relationships the way that you would
fantasize about a giant hearty meal if
you were hungry because temporarily
getting validation from someone who you
perceive to be extra worthy will
temporarily take away that pain of
unworthiness that you feel chronically
across all of the situations of your
life but it's always temporary it's
always that advil that wears off it's
always that meal that doesn't keep you
full it is never just a persistent calm
feeling of i'm good enough i am okay i
am worth loving no matter who or what
does or does not affirm that belief for
me i have an inner sense of security and
safety and calm and i don't need to go
chase these highs to prove that i am
okay so those moments if you're
insecurely attached and i know i have
done so much healing work around the
fearful avoidance style i know how high
the highs feel okay that feeling of i
can temporarily forget about all of the
pain i am in all of the self-hatred i
have all of the ways i don't think i'm
good enough to be in this world the same
way that other people are in this world
to have that temporarily taken away from
your consciousness and be replaced by a
fantasy of yourself as temporarily hyper
worthy which is that feeling we get when
we get a hit of worthiness it's an
incredible feeling unparalleled except
except for having that feeling exist in
a low-grade constant predictable secure
way underscoring everything we do in
life which is what secure attachment
feels like that's also an unparalleled
feeling because that feeling is good and
it's happy and it is euphoric when you
really hone in and focus on it but it is
not overwhelming it is not so intense
that you want to spend your entire life
chasing it it's just consistently there
and when you have that basis of
self-love of thinking of yourself as
good enough and capable enough and
worthy enough for anything that you want
to pursue in life either professionally
personally interpersonally it gives you
a sense of groundedness that allows you
to approach every area of your life with
a heightened sense of presence and
awareness that allows you to reap
maximum benefit out of any situation
that you choose to pursue when you are
in frantic anxious energy you miss so
many of the good things in life because
you're not able to be present enough to
actually appreciate and savor them all
you're thinking is i need my next hit of
validation to make this feeling of
self-loathing go away right but if you
didn't have that feeling if that feeling
were replaced by a chronic sense of
okayness you would be able to appreciate
the world around you the people around
you the opportunities around you
properly and fully for the first time in
your life and that is anything but
boring that is actually the birthplace
the starting place of some of the most
incredible adventures opportunities
ideas you will ever conceive of in your
life and that you will ever plan to
follow through on it is a lack of
preoccupation that allows you to fully
engage with your life and feel it fully
as it's happening to you without the
need for a layer of fantasy on top of it
it allows you to have connections with
people that are truly honest intimate
and vulnerable because you're no longer
trying to get anything out of them so
you can just show up as you are and
allow other people to show up as they
are you don't need to put them on
pedestals which means you can actually
share in the human experience without
having a need to modify it in any
direction do you still get those
feelings of euphoria yeah in certain
moments where things feel really aligned
and beautiful and connected with other
people and with the situations that
you're pursuing but it doesn't feel like
you're standing on this mountaintop that
you could fall off of at any point in
time it feels like even in those moments
you're standing on solid ground when
you're happy and things are going right
there isn't this chronic underlying fear
that you have to hold on to it because
you could lose it at any moment because
you're dealing with the truth and the
truth does not change that quickly it's
only when we have a fantasy that is
temporarily aligning with reality but we
know is not actually reality that we
have to be afraid of it changing all of
a sudden because it can and it will
because it's not real what's real feels
calm when it's bad and when it's good
and so whether things are going well or
they're going badly for us in life when
you have that inner sense of security
all of those experiences feel more deep
and more meaningful than they ever could
when you're just projecting fantasy onto
reality and getting almost a chemical
high out of it right even in those
moments when you're insecurely attached
you know that what you're dealing with
on some level is not real and the
feeling of happiness of contentment of
connection of joy that you know is real
can't be matched by anything that you
could invent inside of your head so all
of this is not to shame anyone for
thinking that secure attachment would be
boring or for not being there yet i
thought for ages the more securely
attached you get the more dull and
lifeless your life becomes no it is like
you start seeing colors you did not know
previously existed because your senses
were blunted and all you could see was
the brightest lights now you can see
every different shade of color the more
secure you become the more beautiful
subtleties you start seeing in the world
and in your relationships with people
and in your relationship to yourself and
that is absolutely worth doing all of
the work for if it's the work that you
decide you want to do alright that's all
i have to say for today i just wanted to
address that because it comes up a lot
it came up for me a lot in my own
consciousness at the beginning of my own
attachment healing work and i wanted to
speak a little bit to that from the
other side as someone who has made a lot
of strides towards secure attachment i
can guarantee you the views get better
not worse and so does the entire inner
emotional experience when things are
good or bad all right that's it for
today let me know in the comments as
always what you're thinking feeling
what's coming up for you in the process
of moving through the attachment healing
work i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and i will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]
you