hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about self-esteem and today in
particular we're going to be talking
about what happens when we go into
social situations feeling aligned
integrated and authentic versus what
happens when we don't so when I first
heard the term that we're going to
discuss today leaky feelings I thought
that is so disgusting and visceral and
perfectly at to what happens when we go
into social situations where we are
feeling one thing but we're unable to
properly contain that feeling and we
don't want to be explicit about it so we
go in claiming that we are feeling or
experiencing one thing well our true
state is evident to everyone around us
based on the way that we are acting
based on our posture our tone whatever
it is and this is one of the things that
causes other people to distrust us the
most
if it seems like what we're saying and
doing are not in alignment with how we
are being so we're going to go over
today why we develop leaky feelings how
to become more aware of when it's
happening to us as well as how to get
into better alignment so how to make
sure that as much as possible we're able
to match our inner state with our outer
one because the more in alignment we are
with ourselves the more confident we
feel and the more relaxed we feel and
the more relaxed we feel the more it
signals to other people I am okay and I
think that you are okay which is that
secure way of relating that we always
want to find a center in if possible so
one of the terms that immediately comes
to mind when I think about leaky
feelings is the term weird energy so
this is one of those things that kind of
floats around in pop culture and there's
no specific definition of it but we all
kind of know what it feels like to be
around someone who's just giving off a
kind of strange uncomfortable Vibe and
often this is a result of that in
congruence so what they're signaling
with their body language or their energy
is quite different than what they're
saying with their words or what they're
doing this idea of congruence in
Psychology was originally proposed by
Carl Rogers who's kind of renowned as
the father of talk therapy and one of
the ways that Carl Rogers described
congruence is that it's an alignment
between our sensation so what we are
feeling or experiencing on a body and
emo level our awareness so what we're
consciously aware of our own experience
being and our Behavior actions and words
so the way that we are showing up in the
world so when we are able to accurately
read
ourselves understand and interpret our
body signals our emotions and our states
accurately and then convey those things
to other people in a way that is honest
and real we are congruent and this is
what I would call Total and ideal
congruence
but that's not always what we have so
there are a couple of different ways
where we can show up in congruently some
of which we're not even consciously in
control of and these are the different
ways that we leak feelings so we have
this kind of Ideal level of congruence
that is kind of optimal for
psychological functioning where
everything I do and say is in agreement
with itself but then we have this layer
beneath it that I call contained in
congruence so this is what happens when
we're aware of what our body sensation
and our feelings are telling us so we're
able to interpret them accurately but
for some reason we've chosen to
deliberately not be honest about what's
happening for us and this is not always
a bad idea right there are situations
where it's actually quite wise to
withhold what we're feeling maybe it's
an attraction towards a coworker who is
in a happily monogamous relationship and
who we just don't feel like it would be
beneficial for us to confess our
feelings for or maybe there's a sense of
anger we feel that is directed towards
someone that we know we are projecting
this anger onto and that really we're in
a triggered state so when we have
contained in congruence essentially
what's happening is we're experiencing a
feeling or an inner state that we're
aware of but that we're able to
self-regulate around enough that our
feelings do not leak out of us so we're
able to actually put the boundaries we
need in place internally in side of our
own minds to be clear on the fact that
we're not going to behave in a way that
is trying to get that emotional state
satisfied externally if we've decided
that it's not appropriate for us to do
that so we have truly found some way to
regulate around our feeling enough that
we're not acting weirdly around our
coworker or around this person that
we're angry at we're able to
compartmentalize in a healthy way put
everything in the appropriate boxes in
our brains and show up in a way that is
inauthentic which is never ideal but
that is not giving off weird energy
because our body state is not leaking
our feelings without us noticing it so
when we have contained in congruence we
might be putting on a little bit of a
show but it's probably because we've
consciously decided that there's a good
reason for us to do that because the
social consequences of being congruent
all the way through would outweigh the
benefits now the layer beneath this is
uncontained in congruence which by the
way are not terms that Carl use the
contained and uncontained congruence is
just language that I use in my own mind
to separate these things out when we
have uncontained in congruence it means
one of two things is likely happening
one is that we are having a feeling
we're not aware of or that we're not
identifying properly so those first two
layers are in Conflict maybe I'm feeling
depressed or overwhelmed or stressed but
I'm not consciously recognizing that and
so there's a conflict between my
sensation and my conscious awareness
aess and that might cause me to leak out
my true feelings so I might go into work
have a presentation to give think that
I'm feeling good about it and this is
often what happens when we have
something like more avoidant patterning
when in reality I might be giving off
signals that I'm actually quite stressed
out but if someone feeds that back to me
I might get pretty defensive because
consciously I don't feel stressed but my
body might be betraying me so I may be
acting in congruent without knowing it
so this is more akin to what we think of
as cognitive dissonance so when what we
think we want or what we think that we
are feeling is not the truth about what
we actually want on a deeper level and I
want to be clear that this happens to
people all of the time this is generally
just where we have blind spots so other
people might be able to actually read us
better in these areas than we can and
that's one type of uncontained in
congruence we can't adjust our behaviors
properly if we don't understand what our
underlying motivations are another
example of this might be people pleasing
we might have this hidden contract
inside of our brains that even we are
not conscious of that we need to go
around meeting other people's needs all
the time so that they will then turn
around and start taking care of us but
we might not be conscious of that at all
our conscious story about ourselves
might be I just love helping people out
of the goodness of my heart and I expect
nothing in return but if we do have that
implicit contract what might start
happening is that when we help people
and don't get the responses we want in
return or the validation that we want in
return we might start to feel angry and
that anger might not be conscious to us
but it might show up on our face in our
posture in our interactions with the
other person and the other person might
be more aware than we are that we are
feeling angry at them because once again
there's that disconnect our anger is
leaking out of us because our conscious
mind refuses to ex accept it and notice
it for what it is this is very often
what happens when we have shame bound
emotions our conscious mind refuses to
recognize that we are feeling something
because we believe it makes us bad or
wrong or shameful to feel that thing but
our body goes on experiencing it and so
this can lead us to showing up with a
lot of weird or unaligned energy it's
very hard to contain and self-regulate
around feelings or states that we're not
aware we are
experiencing the other way to be
experiencing uncontained in congruence
is when you are actually conscious of
what you're feeling or what your body
state is but you're making the
deliberate choice not to share it so
this is a slightly different variation
of contained in congruence in both cases
your body State and your conscious
awareness are aligned so you have
congruence between those two levels but
in this case for whatever reason you're
not able to self-regulate a around your
emotional experience as well as you
would hope so maybe you have a really
strong attraction to someone and you
have the story that it's not a good idea
to tell that person for whatever reason
it would disrupt your social Dynamic too
much but you just can't help when you
get around them fawning a little bit or
acting like you really want their
validation so even though you are not
expressing to them that you feel
attracted to them they can probably kind
of tell or they can at least tell that
something about the way you interact
with them is quite different than the
way that you interact with other people
so you're leaking out those feelings
without realizing it even though you're
not being explicit about what's
happening some other examples of this
could be passive aggressiveness let's
say you are upset at your boss but can't
tell your boss that directly so instead
of stating your anger you just start to
behave in slightly rude or hostile ways
towards your boss on a consistent basis
but then when they ask you if
something's wrong you might say no of of
course not everything's great so your
behavior and the energy that you're
giving off are not aligning you're not
able to effectively self- regulate
around your feeling of anger so it's
coming out even when you don't
necessarily want it to this can also
lead us to sending kind of mixed
messages to people so maybe we're
telling someone I want this from you
because we think we can't ask for the
actual thing we want but then we're not
quite satisfied when they give us the
thing we explicitly stated so let's say
we really want someone's validation but
what we tell them is I just want to be
around you I just want to hang out with
you I just want to spend time with you
but if when we're spending time with
them they're not giving us the subtle
forms of validation that we want from
them we might start acting kind of
passive aggressively once again and this
is going to come across as in congruent
to this person who has given you the
time and energy that you wanted and
asked for but who has failed to give you
the secret hidden desire that you did
not make explicit
so once again these things can be in our
awareness or out of our awareness and
often the more shame bound an emotion is
so the more we have some sort of trauma
response around expressing something and
the more we believe that it would be bad
for us to do that the more that thing is
not going to be in our conscious
awareness and the more likely we are to
be in congruent in situations where we
feel it and I do have a video on toxic
shame and disregulation that I'm going
to link in the description of this one
that gives you more information on how
this plays out on a personal level but
today we're predominantly looking at how
it plays out interpersonally and I just
want to be clear that experiencing this
so being largely in congruent or having
a lot of leaky feelings is not something
to be ashamed of in and of itself it is
very often a completely natural response
to having something like toxic shame or
to Growing Up in environments where we
had to heavily monitor ourselves in
order to not not get rejected or
abandoned but they are generally
something that we want to start
addressing because the more in
congruence we experience the less
confidence we tend to experience
confidence tends to come from a place of
being aligned with who we are on the
inside and who we are on the outside so
when we walk into rooms we give off the
energy that I am okay with myself I am
not full of self-judgment and
self-hatred and I am not at war with my
own inner State air go I don't need you
to do any of that fighting on my behalf
and there is a very specific energy
people pick up on when our body State
matches our words and our actions it
puts people at ease it makes others feel
calm and it helps us to feel confident
and relaxed because we don't have
multiple programs running simultaneously
inside of our minds but to get to this
place it often requires a great deal of
work particularly if we're coming from a
background of insecure attachment trauma
responses cptsd in particular and have
not necessarily been taught how to get
in touch with our authentic selves never
mind how to live our lives from that
place so the first thing I'm going to
recommend you start with if this is
something that you really notice
yourself struggling with is addressing
the problem of in congruence or leaky
feelings on those first two levels of
your inner experiences and your
conscious awareness of them so step one
in becoming more congr ruent as a person
is making the unconscious conscious we
can do this first by noticing where we
experience cognitive dissonance so in
what areas of my life do I consciously
think that I want something but keep
finding myself acting not in alignment
with that so maybe I keep saying I
really want to be healthy but then every
night I go home and I eat junk food
there's some disconnect between what
you're telling yourself you want and
what your body is actually wanting and
most of us try to resolve that
discrepancy by making our Behavior match
what we want to want instead of spending
some time figuring out what is the
deeper want that my body is resolving
for me that I am failing to accept
getting in touch with that is going to
help us with congruence so this is in
simple terms doing Shadow work I do have
some videos on Shadow work that I will
link in the description of this one if
that's a term that is totally new to you
but when we are doing Shadow work what
we're doing is examining our blind spots
so figuring out where our feelings and
our desires are not in our conscious
awareness we can also do this through
examining our relationships with other
people in what ways do we find that we
are consistently not getting the
responses we want or expect out of other
people this might be pointing us towards
a blind spot once again if I think that
I am Mother Teresa and I'm doing
everything in my life for other people
but other people seem kind of turned off
by me is it possible that I'm not
actually attuning to those other people
and giving them what they want I'm
giving them what I want to give them and
my deeper desire is to be validated and
recognized for what I want to give and
again maybe I'm leaking out anger
towards those people because they're not
giving me what I want and noticing how
people are responding to me might be
giving me valuable information about a
blind spot that I have about a place
where my deep wants and desires are not
conscious to me another thing we might
want to look at consciously is which
feelings do I think are the most
shameful this is most likely where we're
going to have weird energy if I think
that there is something inherently wrong
with ever getting angry or ever feeling
desire or excitement when those emotions
come up in me it's likely that I'm going
to struggle to regulate around them so
those are the emotions that might be
more prone to getting leaked out and the
more we make ourselves conscious about
all of this the more choice we now have
about how we want to choose to manage
and communicate our wants and our
feelings this leads us to the next step
in this process of becoming more
congruent which is noticing where your
own in congruencies exist and then
making informed and wise decisions about
when to align your behavior with your
inner State versus when to self-regulate
and contain your inner experience in the
situations where you believe it is
unwise to express it so if we can't have
total congruence we can at least have
contained in congruence where we are not
making other people feel uncomfortable
because while our inter state might not
match our actions we are containing and
regulating around our inter state so
we're not showing up with weird energy
we're aware of the wants we have that
cannot be satisfied and so we're not
unconsciously trying to get them
satisfied out of other people or out of
our environment what we want to be
examining at this level is can I
actually be more congruent than I think
I can at the behavioral level if I know
that I am attracted to someone and I
think that there actually is a way to
let them know that without making them
so uncomfortable that it's unbearable
for us both how might I do that or if
I'm angry at someone how do I make that
conscious for myself and find a way to
have a conversation with them that helps
me Resolve that anger without it leaking
out of me so I always recommend that as
a first line of attack we ask ourselves
the question is it possible for me to
just get aligned all the way through
with this and if so how do I contain
that experience for myself and the other
person while it's happening so maybe
this is creating a kind of new context
that the two of you have never had where
you go to them and say Hey I want to
talk to you about something that might
be kind of challenging for us to talk
about are you open to that and if so can
we talk about what boundaries we might
want to have in in a more serious
conversation that would make us both
feel
comfortable and it doesn't have to be as
robotic as that you can put it in your
own language right I like to tell people
whenever I feel like I want to get a
little bit grittier or raw with them
that I have a preference for
communicating in a way that's a little
bit more honest than average and it's
important for them to understand that if
I'm communicating in a way that's a bit
more honest than average that doesn't
mean that I have the intensity behind
what I'm saying that the average person
would if they were communicating that so
for example if the average person only
expresses anger when it's at an 8 out of
10 if I'm going to someone and saying
hey I feel angry at you and I want to
talk about it but I want to be clear
that most people coming to you with
anger are probably at an eight out of 10
but I am someone who likes to talk about
it when it's at a lower level so I just
don't want you to mistake what I'm about
to say as being a really extreme
response when in actuality it's kind of
a small thing that I'm moving through so
we're finding ways to contain the
experience for ourselves and other
people so that they understand the
context within which we are bringing it
up and they can consent or not consent
to this context and then we want to find
a way to express what we're feeling in
as clear and direct away is possible
without getting too attached to the
outcome so a lot of the time when we are
being in congruent it's because we are
secretly wanting something from somebody
so even if we're expressing the truth
even if I'm sitting in front of someone
and saying I'm really angry at you if I
have decided that I'm not going to be
okay unless they give me a very specific
response I am still being in congruent
until I tell them I'm really angry and
I'm really wanting this response from
you now at the least I am congruent all
the way through the other thing that we
can do is just try to practice being
less attached to outcome so getting real
with ourselves before we go into the
conversation that this might not go the
way I want it to go
but it's more important for me to be
congruent and to say what I'm feeling
and to let someone know what my inner
state is than it is for me to get
something out of them or we just ask
ourselves how can I be maximum congruent
here so how can I let them know not only
what I'm feeling but what my kind of
hidden expectations desires and wants
are even within how I want this
interaction to go and again you might
have to context for them I am not asking
you to behave in a certain way I'm just
letting you know what's in my mind so I
can let it go and so that I am not
showing up with weird unexpressed
wants now what happens when we cannot be
honest and congruent about what we're
feeling or thinking because we do deem
it inappropriate in this case what we
want to do is make sure that we are
containing our own incongruence so
moving it to that second level the
question we ask ourselves here is how do
I make it okay for myself genuinely
truly deeply somatically okay that my
inner and outer world are not aligned
how do I adjust my thought boundaries
and let go of my attachment to outcome
so that I am not leaking out what I
secretly want in every interaction that
I have with someone this might mean
processing some disappointment or some
pain around the fact that you're
probably not going to get what you want
from someone it might be setting really
firm thought boundaries with yourself so
going I will not allow my mind to go to
a place where I am let's say
objectifying or fantasizing about this
person or where I'm having rage Revenge
fantasies about this person maybe
there's a way I need to somatically get
that energy out of my body so that I
don't stay preoccupied with it in my
thoughts so part of this work might be
killing off our fantasies if we are
secretly wanting something from the
external world that we kind of feel like
we have no business wanting or like it
is an overstep for us to expect another
person to fulfill for us what we might
need to do a check on is in what way am
I self-regulating through fantasies of
getting this thing that the other person
can kind of feel when they're around me
and how do I kill off that fantasy so
that it stops leaking out of me this is
kind of practicing mental and emotional
hygiene for ourselves so I remember
going through a period once where I was
holding a lot of anger towards someone
and it was someone who I decided it
would not be wise for me to express my
anger to so I did kind of a thought
experiment where I asked myself who's
someone who I kind of think of as
similar to this person who does the same
types of things that this person does
that make me so angry when they do it
but this other person doesn't really
bother me and what's the difference
between how I am internally representing
those two people so let's say person a
the one who I was so frustrated with and
person B who I found annoying as a
person but not really in a way that I
felt any charge around despite the fact
that a lot of the things they did were
similar to the things that person aided
and what I noticed was that person a was
someone who I felt kind of attached to
on an identity level because they were
someone I'd been close with I was
thinking of their actions as in some way
a reflection on me whereas person B I
was seeing their actions as relatively
impersonal I thought that's just kind of
who they are they would act that way
towards anyone
and then I asked myself if person a is
someone who I'm not willing to express
my anger towards how do I kind of put
them in the same category as person B
where I find their actions annoying but
not in a way that activates me and this
required me to confront some things
around what I was projecting onto person
a and how I needed to let go of my ideas
about what this person's reactions meant
about me in order to have the proper
thought boundaries in place to stop
myself from feeling chronic anger under
the surface about them and once again I
do think that as much as possible it's
better to be congruent all the way
through so to find ways to appropriately
Express what we're feeling even when it
feels challenging but this is a second
best option if that option is not
available to us for whatever reason we
can align our inner and outer worlds
either through expressing our inner
worlds to the people around us or to
adjusting our expectations
internally so that we're no longer
wanting things from the external world
that we know we don't have a way to get
without behaving manipulatively which
very often leads to us leaking our
feelings all over the place and the
reason why this is so important and it's
something we're going to go way more
into in a future video is because the
more congruent we are the easier we form
connections both to ourselves and other
people The More We Trust ourselves
because when we're aware of what most
most of our motivations are on a
conscious level we're able to make more
aligned decisions for ourselves The More
We Trust ourselves the more trustworthy
we are interpersonally as well because
once again we're not fighting this war
inside of ourselves all of the time
we're able to say uncomplicated and
clear yeses and NOS to things and the
more that we're able to trust ourselves
and be trusted by other people the more
our self-esteem Rises and so all of this
eventually goes on to serve us in many
different ways but the first step is
getting aware of when we are doing that
emotional leaking and how we can get
more in alignment with ourselves so that
our feelings our thoughts and our
behaviors are all functioning without
significant conflict this is one of the
biggest and most pervasive routes to
Lasting
confidence all right I am going to leave
it at that for today as always let me
know any thoughts feelings questions you
have in the comment section below I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]