hey guys heidi preep here welcome to my
channel if you are new welcome back if
you are not new on this channel we talk
about myers-briggs personality types
attachment styles and any other systems
that help us understand ourselves and
other people better today i wanted to
talk about the topic of self-regulation
so i want to first let you know that
there are different ways to talk about
self-regulation there is in the moment
self-regulation when you are
experiencing let's say a trigger that is
not what i'm talking about today so
today i am not talking about what to do
in very intense high pressure moments
when you are feeling overwhelming
feelings and need to self-regulate i
probably will talk about that in the
future but what i want to talk about
today is how to self-regulate in a more
long-term fashion okay because i
actually haven't heard that much about
this but this is the basis of what true
self-care is right when we understand
what our needs are and how to give them
to ourselves consistently through the
ups and downs of life that is when we
can truly say we are caring for
ourselves the way that a parent would
care for a child but those of us who are
insecurely attached or who grew up
insecurely attached don't always know
how a healthy parent would care for a
child because maybe that was not an
experience that we had modeled for us so
in this video i want to talk about what
self-regulation is
what attunement is and how we can use
attunement in the process of
re-parenting ourselves in order to give
ourselves some self-regulatory
strategies that work in the long term so
first of all what is self-regulation
self-regulation is the ability to manage
your emotions in a way that is
appropriate to the context that you're
dealing with okay so this definitely
does not mean don't ever feel your
emotions it does not mean don't ever
show your emotions it just means that
when you do become aware of a feeling
you're having you know what the
appropriate way of dealing with it is
and that way of dealing with it helps
you get more of what you want out of
life not less of what you want out of
life so emotional dysregulation often
happens when either we have a trigger
response around something so we have a
very very strong emotional response to
something that doesn't necessarily
warrant that level of an emotional
response and that happens because the
past and our unresolved trauma lives in
our bodies right and when a trigger
point comes up for us that past can
suddenly project itself onto the present
and we can be reacting as though
something in the past is happening now
without realizing that that's what we're
doing so that's one way of becoming
emotionally disregulated and that can
obviously happen on a huge gradient so
you can have a very big trigger you can
have a fairly small trigger and the way
that those triggers show up in your body
and in your mind are going to be very
different and probably need different
strategies for coping with them but we
aren't necessarily triggered when we're
emotionally dysregulated sometimes we
are just kind of emotionally out of
whack and a lot of the time again
especially for those of us who are
insecurely attached when you're feeling
out of whack you might not be aware of
why you're feeling that way so it can be
difficult and at times kind of
overwhelming to try to figure out what
to do with your emotions if you don't
understand why they're showing up for
you in what context they're showing up
for you and what is going to help you
feel calmer and more at peace and the
way that we can get to a place where we
have a lot more of that emotional
self-awareness is through the process of
attuning to ourselves the way a parent
would attune to a child so what is
attunement attunement is the process of
tuning in to what's going on for someone
else and allowing our internal state to
react to their state so if you have a
child and the child starts crying the
secure parent might pick the child up
and they're gonna see oh my baby's in
distress maybe they'll make kind of a
sad face back at the baby and rock it a
little bit and soothe it until it calms
down but that baby is going to see
initially that their inner state is
mirrored in the parent's face right when
the parent kind of gives them a
sympathetic look they're showing to the
baby i see your pain i'm acknowledging
it and now i'm going to help you soothe
it that's attunement when we are able to
identify what someone else is feeling
reflect it back to them accurately and
make that connection with them a lot of
how insecure attachment forms is when
parents are not adequately attuned to
their infants so let's say every time
you're sad as a baby your parent who
might not have a high threshold for
tolerating sadness in themselves might
pick you up and put a huge smile on
their face and try to rock you back and
forth and convince you that nothing's
wrong and that you feel great that
parent though they are well-meaning is
not necessarily attuned to you properly
therefore you're going to grow up with a
sense of confusion about your own
internal states are you happy or are you
sad because we learn who we are through
our parents helping us make sense of our
emotions very early on in life so an
attuned parent helps their child
understand themselves in a very
straightforward and true way but an
unattuned parent distorts the child's
experience of what's happening for them
internally and they get confused now
when this was our early experience often
the problem is that we don't know how to
attune properly to our own internal
states as adults so if you think of
yourself as kind of the observing self
so the part of yourself that's able to
be mindful and notice what's going on
for you and the experiencing self so the
self that reacts to things
physiologically before you have the
chance to understand or to become
conscious of those reactions you can
kind of think of yourself as two
different parts right emotions arise in
the body before they arise in the
conscious mind so we don't always get a
lot of choice about how we're feeling
but we do get a choice about how we will
deal with and process the feelings that
do come up for us so let's say you have
an avoidant attachment style avoidantly
attached people are very biased towards
thinking that if my emotion does not
make sense i must be wrong about the
emotion right so if i don't think that
it makes sense for me to be angry in a
certain situation but my body feels kind
of angry and agitated i might attribute
it falsely to something else and go oh
well i just had too much coffee today or
oh i just need to get a little bit more
exercise and on the flip side of things
those who lean a little bit more anxious
might assume that there is nothing they
can do to change their feelings so once
a feeling is happening they might think
that the only option they have is to let
it run its natural course and they might
almost feel like they're at the mercy of
their emotions when they come up right
so those on the anxious side of the
spectrum tend to be really identified
with that body sense of felt emotion
emotions feel very strong and
overpowering a lot of the time in your
body but those on the avoidant side of
the spectrum are very disconnected from
their emotions and are often trying to
tell themselves that they are not
feeling something that they truly are
feeling and in both cases the truth is
in the middle right so where avoidance
tend to struggle is with validating
their feelings i'm gonna make a whole
video just on this but basically the
cole's notes is if you are feeling
something you are feeling that thing it
doesn't matter if it doesn't make sense
all that matters is that it is in your
body because emotions live in the body
right so if you think i shouldn't be
jealous of this person but jealousy is
showing up in your body that is what's
happening unfortunately whether it makes
sense or not now this does not mean that
you have to act on that feeling right
feeling something does not necessitate
how you're going to deal with it in the
real world but the feeling is there so
for avoidance the work here lies in
being accurately attuned to their own
emotional experience what you are doing
to yourself if you have an avoidant
attachment style is what a parent might
be doing to a child who is crying who
they pick up and put a big smile on
their face and reflect back to them no
no you're not sad you're happy it's
confusing for the child and it is still
confusing for you inside of your body
when you try to convince yourself this
thing that is truly happening in my body
is not happening it creates this very
bizarre divide between brain and body
that can in many cases show up later as
psychosomatic illness because what's
left unprocessed in the body does not go
away in many cases it gets louder and
louder until we have to stop and listen
to our bodies and on the flip side of
things if you have an anxious attachment
style you might be good at recognizing
and identifying your feelings but what
you are missing out on in this process
is the part of the process where the
parent yes picks up empathizes with and
sees the baby's emotion but then they
also help the baby figure out a
constructive solution right so when
we're using an avoidant attachment
strategy we're missing the attunement
piece and when we're using an anxious
attachment strategy we're missing the
solution piece right
so there is a process that needs to
happen from either end of the spectrum
of one becoming aware of what you're
feeling and accurately name that feeling
when it shows up in your body and then
figuring out what you need to do to work
with that emotion and by working with
that emotion avoidance i do not mean
getting rid of it i mean integrating it
and figuring out what it's trying to
tell you and also how you can solve
whatever problem it's alerting you to
okay so you need accurate naming and
also accurate solutions and the first
step in this process is learning to take
your feelings seriously acknowledge them
even if they don't make sense to you and
name them as they come up so an app that
i really like that i discovered in the
past six months and this is not at all
sponsored but dalio if you're watching
this and you want to sponsor me i'm
happy to continue formally recommending
you guys um the app is called delio and
basically you can set it to notify you
multiple times a day and every time it
notifies you you stop and do a check-in
where you say how you're feeling so it
gives you a list of different emotions
and you can customize it and add your
own and then a list of actions so what's
going on for you in different areas and
over a long period of time it tracks
what you're feeling with which
activities you were engaging in when you
were feeling those things and so you end
up getting some really cool data like i
have data on my phone right now about if
i am feeling really depressed which
activity is the most likely to get me
out of that depressed state so for me
there is usually a considerable increase
in my low mood when i get a long sleep
go for a walk and talk to a friend and
the app has actually compiled that data
and now it's almost like there's an
action plan for what i can do when i'm
feeling low energy so you don't have to
use an app to do that i find it really
easy to but that's an example of what
emotional self-attunement looks like
becoming aware of our own patterning and
figuring out what we're feeling when as
well as which feelings tend to be paired
to which activities are which things
that happen to us in life and in some
cases you might be surprised i tend to
think that my life is ending every time
i don't get enough sleep for like one
day right and i think i am this super
emotionally complex human being now i
need a good sleep and i need it to be
sunny out and that is literally it that
is all it takes to make me happy okay
maybe a conversation with a friend but
it's not as complicated a lot of the
time as i think it is so that's step one
is learning to attune to yourself don't
tell yourself you're being pathetic if
what you're actually feeling is sad
because those are two different things
saying you're pathetic implies that you
are inventing your sadness when you feel
it but if it's in your body if you feel
sadness in your body it's real and not
naming it for what it is is detrimental
to your ability to handle it properly so
if you can name i'm sad and you can just
sit with that and log it when it comes
up eventually you will figure out what
helps you get rid of that feeling of
sadness if and when you decide that it's
time for you to do that and so the
second part of this process is figuring
out how to take care of yourself not the
way a child would take care of
themselves but the way an adult would
take care of a child who they were
deeply attuned to so a loving caring
attuned parent
recognizes when their child is in
distress they recognize their children's
needs and they're able to provide space
for that child while also gently pushing
them towards a solution to the problem
that's going to be holistically helpful
for them and a holistically helpful
solution is pretty much never ignore
your feelings pretend they're not
happening and barrel on anyways but
sometimes it is acknowledge that you're
feeling sad right now recognize that
there's something you need to get done
anyway find a way to compartmentalize
for a little bit get those things that
you promised to yourself you would do
done and then let's make an appointment
with ourselves later to revisit that
feeling that we were feeling and spend
some time with it so in this case we are
neither dismissing our emotions nor are
we getting endlessly lost in them and
sidetracked by them and i find that
individuals on each side of the spectrum
tend to really fear that being the
consequence like avoidance really fear
that if they feel their feelings they're
going to kind of fall into this endless
pit of emotion where they will never be
able to be productive or get anything
done again and those on the anxious side
of the spectrum tend to fear that if
they ignore their feelings for even a
second the world will fall apart because
they will not be attending to something
that feels incredibly important and
neither thing is true right there's
balance in the middle of both things but
in order to self-regulate like that over
a long period of time we have to be
aware of what we're feeling moment to
moment and also aware of what helps us
navigate those emotional spaces when we
get caught in them so for example in
this past week i was really struggling
with a very low mood one day i had a lot
that felt very overwhelming going on in
my life and i wanted to wallow in that
like i wanted to sit there and just feel
endlessly sorry for myself but i was
thinking to myself okay this is no
longer feeling productive right i think
if we're listening very closely to our
bodies we know when sadness kind of
crosses a line and it's no longer
helpful for us to be processing and i
was able to think critically about what
tends to help me get out of a
persistently low mood and into a better
mood and implement action in that
direction but to do that i had to have a
strong self-awareness about my own inner
emotional experience and what that
landscape looks like the first place so
it's a balance between knowing ourselves
and knowing how to lovingly parent
ourselves when we are caught in any
particular direction and knowing where
you're starting from so if you lean more
anxious struggling to get out of your
negative moods or more avoidant
struggling to acknowledge your negative
moods that gives you a little bit of
awareness of where you might need to do
more of the work or what part of the
process might not come as naturally to
you but the brilliant part is that if
you can learn to do this properly it
will save you so much time and energy
because when we are working with our
true emotions as they show up in our
body when we are in tune with our
natural energy we are able to get more
of what we want out of life because we
are not fighting ourselves in the
process right even if we're ignoring and
denying and pretending that our emotions
are not there and just barreling on
forward often we are going way past the
point of burnout and we are not getting
the results we want because we're not
listening to our natural limits which
our emotions tell us and on the flip
side if we are only following our
emotions and only doing what our
emotions are telling us to do we're
gonna get stuck in a lot of loops that
we think we can think or feel our way
out of when actually we need to act our
way out of but all of this requires us
having that adult self really online in
our minds taking the emotional
information that our body systems are
giving us seriously and responding to it
the way a wise adult would because we
all have that adult in us somewhere part
of this for the anxious side of the
spectrum is also going to be not getting
lost in your stories so when i feel sad
maybe i feel sad for like one afternoon
but if i spend that whole afternoon
telling myself a story about my own
sadness i'm going to continue to pull
that feeling back into my body over and
over and over again because i'm so
entrenched in my own story right so we
have to actually be very attentive
moment to moment day by day hour by hour
about how we're feeling in our body and
what's showing up for us in the present
moment because often we don't even
realize when we're telling ourselves
those stories right so check in with
your body first and foremost not your
mind in order to figure out what it is
that you need and use your adult self to
develop a strategy around getting that
for you without running the rest of your
life off the rails in the process so
this is obviously all a product of
learning to be a healthy parent for
yourself who is both sensitive to your
own needs and responsible and capable of
providing you with the concrete things
you need to live a stable and secure
life and that is no small feat right
especially when you're coming from an
insecurely attached place because it
means integrating one side of the
spectrum either emotional or cognitive
that you missed out on a healthy
development process around early on in
life so it's going to require building a
lot of skills and that's why attachment
healing takes such a long time but
developing that self-attunement and that
ability to self-regulate over a
consistent period of time is gonna get
you way further along the route to
developing a secure base within yourself
then sticking with that outdated
strategy well that only ever looked at
one side of the coin at a given point in
time all right that is all that i have
to say for today on emotional
self-regulation through self-attunement
that is a mouthful let me know in the
comments what your thoughts are which
aha moments or which things are coming
up for you as you go through these
videos as always i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and i will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]
you