hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel for the
past couple of weeks we have been
talking about Shadow work so if you
don't know what I mean when I say the
term Shadow work I will link a video in
the description of this one that goes
over what that term is as well as how
you can start recognizing and working
with your own psychological Shadow but
for those of you who have been around
for a while we are going to cross over
the term Shadow work with one of the
other terms we talk about very
frequently on this channel which is
limerence so again there's a link in the
description of this video if you don't
know what the term limerence means but
for those of you who do what I'm going
to be talking about today specifically
is how we can work with our experience
of limerence to get at which positive
traits we may have repressed into our
shadow when we hear the term Shadow work
what most people think of is all of the
kind of negative or unpleasant emotions
that they might have shoved into their
Shadow so emotions like anger or fear or
uncertainty or vulnerability or pain but
depending on what was adaptive for you
in your early environment what might be
in your Shadow is actually a lot of
positive traits so you could have joy in
your Shadow you could have self-reliance
and Independence in your Shadow you
could have creativity or positive energy
in your Shadow the only kind of rule
about what ends up in your Shadow is
whatever was non-adaptive for you to
feel into and Express at a young age and
I just want to be clear that when I say
terms like good or bad or positive or
negative emotion States I'm not talking
about moral judgments of those emotional
states so I'm not saying that it's good
to feel Joy and bad to feel pain we need
all of our emotions the entire range of
them is very important but I'm just
describing the kind of felt sense that
most people apply to certain emotional
states so most of us do not enjoy the
experience for example of being in pain
most of us do enjoy the experience of
feeling hopeful or joyful so when I say
positive and negative or good or bad
feelings again I'm not assigning a moral
judgment I'm just talking about what it
feels like to subjectively experience
those States
so there is not any literature or any
research that has been done at least
that I could find on the intersection
between limerence and Shadow work so
today's video is going to be a largely
Theory based speculative and just kind
of an overview of what I found to be
useful and what kind of gold I've been
able to mine out of my past experiences
of limerence in order to get at what's
being repressed in my shadow so if you
think of the experience of having
limerence or being limerent about
someone it's very different than the
experience of love love and connection
are present moment experiences that are
tied to the actual experience that we're
having of another person so let's say I
have a real relationship with someone
named Jack maybe Jack is a friend maybe
he's someone I'm getting to know as a
potential romantic partner maybe he's
already a romantic partner or a lover
but there's a lot of inconsistency in
our connection there is a real
relationship that I have with that
person that real relationship consists
of the times that we spend together the
words that we exchange with each other
the commitments we have or haven't made
to each other right there's the
relationship that exists in reality but
then there is also our internal
representation of a person and this is
true of every relationship so there's
the actual person who exists outside of
the South and then there's the
representation we have of that person
inside of our heads so if I have this
real life relationship with Jack I also
have a little mini jack that lives in my
brain that I think about and interact
with and the more limerent we are about
someone generally the more time we're
spending interacting with that internal
representation of them so we might be so
afraid of rejection from the real life
version of this person that we actually
severely limit our interactions with
them and kind of give ourselves just
enough fodder for the internal
representations to go wild and my theory
here around limerence is that a lot of
the time what we're doing when we're
experiencing limits when we are having
obsessive thoughts about wanting to be
accepted or loved by another person is
we are putting an internal
representation of a real person in
between ourselves and an emotion that we
need to give ourselves external
permission to feel
so the first thing that's kind of
important to understand here is that
another person cannot make you feel an
emotion if it were true then another
person could make you feel an emotion
that person would elicit the exact same
emotion every time they said or did a
certain sequence of words or events to
absolutely anyone so if I am so enamored
with Jack and I think it's just because
Jack is so wonderful and I think that
that has nothing to do with me it would
mean that in theory everyone who meets
Jack would be madly in love with him as
well but that's not the case think of
your internal emotional world like a
high-rise building with thousands of
rooms in it and each room is a different
emotional experience you could have now
imagine that every single room has a key
that it can be unlocked with and the
rooms that are in our conscious
awareness are the rooms that we have the
key to now the emotions that are in our
shadow can kind of be thought of as the
rooms that we don't have the keys to
because in our very very early life we
learned that those rooms were dangerous
to go into we just took those keys and
threw them somewhere where we knew that
we would never find them again and now
there are these certain parts of
ourselves that we don't necessarily know
how to easily access and so when someone
else walks into our life and opens that
door and we allow ourselves to walk
through it for the first time because
someone else has provided the key it
feels like magic and we might start
looking at that other person who had the
key to that door and go how did you do
that you created this absolute Act of
God when in reality all that's happening
is that through another person we are
allowing ourselves permission to feel
something that we don't normally allow
ourselves to feel
so I'll give an example there was a
period of my life where I was
exceptionally limerent because I was in
a state of deep grief and I remember
having the experience of meeting someone
who was unbelievably positive they just
had this outlook on life that was so
enthusiastic and gung-ho and they had
these kind of bold daring even kind of
brash qualities that I just found
absolutely irresistible
and when I look back at that period of
my life what I notice is how much those
traits that that person was embodying
were in contrast to the way that I was
feeling as well as what I had
internalized about what it means to be a
positive person
so in my early life I had learned that
to be positive meant to be ignoring
reality and the reason I learned that
was because there were early conditions
in which that was true there was a lot
going on for me where had I looked at it
realistically and through an undistorted
lens the result would have been kind of
depressing on a lot of counts and so I
had this inborn association between
positivity and having one's head in the
sand and then I met someone who was
wildly intelligent and also very
positive and it was like I walked
through this room inside of myself for
the first time where I allowed myself to
believe that there was real positivity
in the world that it was possible to
actually look at the facts see things
clearly laid out and still believe that
there was hope and excitement and joy in
the world and that door inside of myself
that very specific room that was
realistic positivity was a room that I
don't think I'd ever accessed before and
I didn't know how to get back in there
without this other person being around
and so I became very fixated on needing
that person to be close to me and
needing to have them in my life and more
than anything else I wanted them to want
me because if they wanted me that meant
that they were mirroring something
inside of me that I had no idea how to
otherwise access and so my internal reps
presentation of this person became the
permission that I gave myself to go
inside of that room and the kind of
moral here is that with limerence I
think what often happens is we
experience it and it gets quickly
covered up by either shame or fixation
so we either run away with these
thoughts and we really tell ourselves
all I need to be happy and fulfilled is
this other person's love and adoration
and attention or we go oh my God I'm
being crazy and we write the whole thing
off and just try to get ourselves to
stop feeling that way but I think there
can actually be a lot of value in just
being sober with ourselves about the
experience
so if I'm feeling limerent about
somebody the first thing I want to do is
separate out who is the real life person
because that is very important to not
lose track of if we start confusing the
real life person for our internal
representation of the person we can
start acting really weird and in some
cases really disrespectfully towards the
other person because putting someone on
a pedestal is absolutely erasing their
humanity and it's not a kind thing to do
but if we can learn to separate out the
real person and the actual relationship
that we have with them from the internal
representation that we have of the
person who we might be having limerent
thoughts about now we can acknowledge to
ourselves I am having this limits I'm
experiencing these thoughts because
there is something that my unconscious
mind is desperate for me to integrate
into my own self-concept but it finds it
too threatening for me to look directly
at it so I'm using the internal
representation of this person as kind of
an archetype inside of my own mind for
what it would be like for it to be okay
for me to allow myself to feel that so
in the example I just gave my brain was
desperate to believe that there was some
sort of Hope in the world that was not
delusional some part of me believe that
to be true or else I would not have
gotten so fixated on it inside of this
other person so then the work becomes
how do I source that hope for myself
how do I start giving myself permission
to believe those things without having
to get the other person's approval in
order to enter that room that's inside
of me there's another period of my life
where I was feeling extraordinarily
nihilistic like I had had a large
collapse in my systems of meaning and I
became limerent about someone who I
viewed as very intelligent and
spiritually explorative and I noticed
that I really started following this
person intellectually into a lot of
their more spiritual Pursuits
and I'm not huge generally on DreamWork
or on Vision work but young was a big
proponent of using dreams and Visions we
have as doorways to the unconscious mind
and I remember at one point having a
dream of this person that was so vivid
where we were sitting together in a dark
room and they were holding a flashlight
and I remember having this feeling like
as long as I'm following this person who
has this ability to kind of shed light
on the darkness I'm going to be safe and
okay
and I woke up and wrote that dream down
and I recognized so clearly that this
feeling of being lost and in the dark
was so prevalent for me at that point in
my life
and what I needed to do to get rid of
these limerent thought patterns which
were not serving me was to get to the
place where unconsciously I believed
that I was the one holding a flashlight
and Shining Light on the areas of my
life that felt scary or uncertain and
for about six months I had this journal
where every morning it prompted you to
write an affirmation for the day I wrote
down I am holding my own flashlight in
the dark and I would do a quick
visualization where I would literally
picture myself in that room that had
appeared in My Dreams by myself holding
the flashlight that in the dream my
limerent object had been holding and the
more I did that visualization the more I
allowed myself permission to feel into
what that would be like what could it be
like to feel in my body like I'm the one
leading the way like I'm the one
venturing out into these scary unknowns
and finding the answers that I've been
searching for and the more I did this
visualization and identified that as the
direction that my unconscious mind was
begging me to develop in the more my
limerence naturally fell away and all
that was left was my actual relationship
with this person and my renewed
relationship with my own Spiritual
Development and growth which was the
real thing that my mind had been
desperately trying to integrate the idea
here is to just take cues from what it
is about your limerent object or the way
that you feel around your limerent
object that might indicate what you are
desperately trying to integrate into
your overall self-concept so at this
point in my life if I ever have limerent
thought patterns pop up the question I
try to zero in on and ask myself is what
am I allowing myself to feel when I'm
having a limerent fantasy that I don't
usually allow myself to feel in real
life
or what do I think it would mean about
me if this person were to consistently
love me and why is it that I can't seem
to think of that thing as true about
myself without their love or without the
returning of their affection and what
that gives you the potential opportunity
to do is to chart a course for where
your body and unconscious mind are
already wanting you to go next and we
can use both positive and negative
experiences of limerence to inform this
work so when I say positive and negative
experiences Dorothy tenov who is the
person who coined limerence and wrote
extensively about it talks about how
limerence is both a positive and
negative experience so when we are
feeling like the object of our affection
is potentially returning our adoration
we can feel on top of the world and like
nothing bad is ever going to happen
again but when we are fearful that they
are not returning our affections or that
they're not interested in us we can feel
absolutely lower than low and I implore
us all to think about those lows as you
useful information as well so if my
limerent object doesn't love me back
what do I think that means about me as a
person versus what would it mean about
me as a person if they did love me back
chances are this is indicating a
humongous polarity that exists within us
so what it can be helpful to pay
attention to is what do we want our
limerent objects to be thinking about us
so let's say I have a limerent fantasy
where in my fantasy my limerent object
is looking at me and thinking that is
the most eloquent and graceful person I
have ever seen in my life and in the
negative form of that fantasy when I'm
freaking out that I think they don't
like me back maybe I'm going oh my God I
knew it all along I have no class and
this person would never be interested in
someone like me
now what my psyche is begging me to
integrate is my desire to move more in
the direction of eloquence and Grace
maybe those are traits that I didn't
feel like I was able to develop at a
young age because maybe it worked better
for me to be the kind of chill person
who lets everything roll off their back
when in reality there's a part of me
that is really attracted to the idea of
a more refined experience of myself in
relationships I just need to give myself
permission to allow that part of myself
to emerge in the world and I can thank
the internal representation of Jack for
allowing me to feel that and allowing me
to realize that about myself and then I
can start taking intentional steps in
that direction of allowing myself to
grow into the type of person that I
think Jack would love which really has
nothing to do with Jack though I might
have a real relationship with him as
well and it has everything to do with
the parts of me that my own psychology
is begging me to finally allow myself to
love and accept and again at the end of
the day all of us have access to all of
these rooms inside of ourselves and they
all have a Time in a place so all of us
are graceful and eloquent in some
circumstances and really chill and laid
back or even a little crass in other
situations and so doing this type of
work does not mean that we are erasing
who we were and stepping into who we
think someone else wants us to be all it
means is that we are taking these
obsessive fixated thoughts more at face
value than we normally do and go okay
what is my unconscious mind begging me
to integrate right now maybe it's easier
for me to see that quality in another
person than in my cell so how do I give
myself permission to access it in my
cell so that I no longer have to project
it outwards and feel desperate to get
access to it through someone else's
approval I'm going to leave that there
for today I hope what I'm saying makes
sense to some of you you can let me know
in the comments if it resonates with
your experience or if it doesn't and
again I want to be clear that this isn't
necessarily the only expression of
limerence or the only only thing behind
it but it's one way that I've found it
can be effective to work with it rather
than just trying to endlessly distance
ourselves from it because again the
moment we name a fantasy a fantasy we're
back in reality so if we can recognize
this limerence this obsessiveness this
fixated thought pattern doesn't have all
that much to do with the real person
it's this internal representation of
them that I'm fixated on which tells me
much more about myself and my own
psychology now we're getting clear on
what's reality what's fantasy and what
parts of ourselves we're needing to do
work on so that we can show up as more
whole people in the world and when we're
able to show up as more whole and
integrated versions of ourselves it's
actually a lot easier to Foster those
real Connections in a relaxed
non-neurotic and genuinely open and
loving way so in theory it's a win all
around it just requires us to get honest
with ourselves about what's actually
going on
all right now I'm actually gonna leave
it at that let me know what's coming up
for you guys as always I love you I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and your inner children and
all of the various things they are
begging you to integrate and I will see
you back here again really soon
foreign