hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we talk
about different psychological Concepts
and models that help us understand
ourselves and other people better so
that we can have more fulfilling and
overall better lives and relationships
and by better I mean getting more of
what we do want out of our lives and
relationships and less of what we don't
want today we're talking about the
concept of limerence if that term is
brand new to you I do have a video that
goes over what it means and some signs
that you might be experiencing it so I
will link that in the description of
this video you can go watch it and then
make your way back here if this is a
term that's already familiar to you what
we're going to be going over today is
how many of us use limerence as a means
of self-regulation and I think that this
is a really important thing to
contextualize if this is what we're
doing because as with any psychological
block or thing that is getting in our
way of having happier and healthier
lives if we are not naming it properly
we're not really able to tackle it
effectively and a lot of the time when
we are limerent what we think we're
doing is speculating about developing a
close-connected relationship with
someone when what we're actually doing
is soothing some sort of negative
emotional state that's arriving for us
in the moment with a romantic fantasy so
expecting to form a close-connected
loving relationship in reality through
limerence is kind of like expecting to
make a baby through masturbation it
might feel like a similar act but it
does not at all produce the same result
so today we're going to look at five
signs that you might be using limerence
as a means of self-regulation before we
get into those I will quickly go over
what I mean when I say self-regulation
so co-regulation in the psychological
sense means managing our emotional or
physiological State through connection
with another person so this can be as
simple as talking to a friend when
you're stressed out and noticing that
your stress level starts to decrease and
as you're speaking with them they're
mirroring you back to yourself it could
mean going in for a prolonged hug with a
loved one and noticing your body start
to relax the longer you stay with that
physical touch so co-regulation is a
very wonderful and important part of
life as is self-regulation so
self-regulation in the psychological
sense of the term is managing our
emotional and physiological State
without input from another person so the
parallel examples here might be
journaling out your feelings when you're
feeling stressed out and overwhelmed and
noticing that the more you name your own
feelings and sit with them the more your
state starts to change or taking a warm
bath or feeding yourself a meal that you
enjoy or doing exercise when you're in
some sort of uncomfortable physiological
state that returns you to a more
comfortable state
both self and co-regulation are very
important parts of being alive however
some of us have learned to over rely on
one or the other or in certain areas we
might over rely on one or the other so
maybe we're perfectly comfortable
seeking out help and support at work but
not in our romantic relationships or
vice versa in most areas of life it's
very important to develop discernment
around when co-regulation is the best
overall choice for both ourselves and
the other people we're seeking it out
from and when we need self-regulation
and often limerence comes up when what
we're craving is co-regulation but
there's some sort of block in the way of
us feeling like we can get it so maybe
we're experiencing toxic shame and going
to another person and telling them what
we're going through and experiencing
feels way too vulnerable and we feel
like we would be rejected so limerence
can be this way of self-regulating and
Imagining the sense of connection that
we're seeking in a way that changes our
physiological state or our emotional
state temporarily and can help kind of
return us to Baseline now where we get
into trouble is when we're being
limerent but we're not aware that what
we're doing is using it as a
self-regulatory tool then we start
thinking okay reality needs to start
resembling my fantasy in order for me to
feel okay not recognizing that the
fantasy was all we really needed in that
moment now once again limerence is to
love what masturbation is to sex it
might feel similar to the real thing
however it is not the real thing the
problem is that we don't usually mix up
masturbation and sex we usually know
when we're doing which one with
limerence and love a lot of us are very
quick to mix those things up we might
think that thinking these limerent
thoughts about somebody is loving them
when in reality all we're doing is
soothing ourselves so what we're going
to do now is go into five signs that you
might be using limerence as a means of
self-regulation because like with
anything our problems tend to get better
once we give them the accurate name so
we're going to talk now about how to do
that sign number one that you are using
limerence as a means of self-regulation
is that you have a terrible fear of
reality intruding upon your fantasy
world to the point where you might
actually experience significant anxiety
around the thought of spending too much
time or learning too much about the
person who you have limerence around
because you might be unconsciously
terrified that you're going to find
something out about them that you don't
want to know because it will be
incompatible with the fantasy that you
have about them insecure relationships
so relationships that are based in
reality and are mostly about true in the
moment connection all information about
the other is welcomed in including the
information we don't really like and the
reason why it's important if you're
building a secure connection to welcome
in both good and bad information about
the other is because the end goal of
secure connections is making informed
decisions about who we want to spend our
time with and if we're looking for
committed long-term romantic partnership
making sure that the person we're
committing to is someone who shares our
true values and wants inside of a
relationship so finding something out
like this person isn't really a
relationship person would probably be a
very valuable piece of information to
know if you're looking for committed
long-term relationship however if you
are limerent about the person if what
you are doing is using the thought of
this person and romantic fantasies about
them as a means of self-regulation
you're going to get really good at
pushing out of your awareness any
information that does not conform to the
fantasy you're having so rather than
keeping a kind of running tally on ways
in which you are and are not aligned
with this person or things you do and
don't like about them or ways in which
you are and are not compatible you're
going to be only looking for pieces of
information in your interactions with
them that give you better fodder for
your fantasies and I want to point out
that this is not something you are
consciously doing in another video we'll
talk about why some of us develop
limerence from a very young age and how
it's actually psychologically adaptive
when we have difficult childhoods so
this isn't to shame or blame you if you
realize that this is what you're doing
it's just something to be aware of when
I'm interacting with my limerent object
am I actually open to learning things
about them that I might not like or that
might change my perception of our
compatibility and am I letting that
information change the way I think about
them so if I find out some way in which
we're not compatible now when the
interaction's over and I go home and
think about them am I factoring in that
information because I'm forming a
realistic picture of what a life with
this person would look like or am I
finding a way to romanticize even the
red flags because our connection in
reality is not as important to me as the
connection that I am imagining inside of
my mind that I'm using to self-regulate
when I'm alone sign number two that
you're probably using limerence to
self-regulate is that you go through
significant periods of being more and
less limerent and you don't know why so
when we are going through let's say
major life changes when we are grieving
a loss when we are trying to Grapple
with something that has happened to us
that we don't know how to make sense of
what we tend to need during those
periods is a lot of comfort if we don't
know how to ask for Comfort or how to
seek out comfort interpersonally so if
we don't know how to get secure
consistent co-regulation what we're
going to do is try to start comforting
ourselves through any means possible and
limerence the fixation on getting the
attention and validation of another
person and then having a rich inner
fantasy world about it can be a really
huge maladaptive but nonetheless
temporarily effective dose of comfort
when we are going through a difficult
period so what I encourage you to do if
you're someone who has struggled with
limerence is look back over your life
and just notice the periods in which you
were particularly limerent what else was
going on for you had you just move to a
new city had you just gone through a
breakup had you lost someone in the
recent past when I look back on my own
life the most limerent period I ever
went through was a period after which I
had experienced two major losses in very
quick succession and it was like my mind
just could not handle that did not know
who to go to for support and became
limerent as hell for about a year and I
think this is something that it's worth
having some compassion for ourselves
around I kind of look at limerence as
this magic fairy pixie dust that some of
us just sprinkle on top of the crap in
our lives is this the most adaptive way
of coping with the crap absolutely not
but if you don't have better coping
mechanisms available to you it is a way
of getting yourself through it so in
order to start figuring out what your
triggers are what things might happen in
your life that can flip you quickly into
limerence you're going to want to look
at when it has come up for you in the
past and start noticing any patterns
you're able to around when you became
the most limerent historically sign
number three that you're using limerence
as a means of self-regulation is that
you feel whole and lovable and complete
in your own limerent fantasies in a way
that you don't in your everyday life
so once again when a secure person is
forming a connection with someone there
isn't necessarily a huge difference in
the way that they think of themselves
when they're alone versus the way that
they think of themselves when they're
with this other person they have that
I'm okay you're okay worldview so there
isn't this sense of I'm only okay and I
only like myself if this person approves
of me and loves me back there's a sense
of I want this person to approve of me
and like me back if I like them because
then maybe we could be close and that
would be nice however if that isn't the
way they feel about me it's not going to
change the way I feel about myself I'm
going to like myself and respect myself
just as much if this person decides they
don't want to be with me than if they do
even if my feelings get a little hurt or
it sucks a little bit in the process but
it's not going to fundamentally mess
with my idea of how I think about myself
now those who experience a lot of
limerence are often using limerent
fantasies as an escape from toxic shame
so the way that you feel when you are
not engaged in these limerent thoughts
or when you are not able to seek some
sort of small confirmation that maybe
this person is interested in you or
likes you back or is paying attention to
you in the same way that you're paying
attention to them you're likely to feel
significantly different because the
difference between toxic shame and a
reprieve from toxic shame is a night and
day emotional state so when you are
using limerent fantasies as a mental and
emotional reprieve from toxic shame you
are probably imagining a world that
includes a very idealized version of
both the other person and yourself
you're seeing them as almost perfect and
more than human and you're seeing
yourself as finely lovable and worthy by
virtue of the fact that they think that
of you so there's this sense in your
fantasy world of finally being someone
who you can accept and you can love just
for who you are because you are giving
yourself permission to feel that through
this other person's approval when in
reality when you step away from that
fantasy when you imagine what it would
be like if in real life the other person
did not return your affections you might
find yourself kind of engulfed in that
sense of toxic shame that inability to
be present with and accepting of
yourself and again this is not a moral
failing it is often the product of early
wounding and the responses we developed
to that wounding as children that were
once adaptive but can become maladaptive
in adulthood but the main thing to pay
attention to at this point is in your
romantic fantasies in your limerent
thoughts when you get that confirmation
that ooh maybe this person is interested
in me how different is that feeling from
the way that you normally feel and the
bigger the discrepancy that exists the
more likely it is that you're using
these limerent fantasies as a means of
self-regulating When You're Feeling
Extreme toxic shame you need to imagine
something
extraordinarily overwhelmingly positive
to kind of balance out that emotional
state and the good and the bad news is
that this end of the extreme this
Redemption fantasy this savior fantasy
of someone being capable of solving the
way that you feel about yourself is not
true however this end of the spectrum
where you believe that you are
inherently worthless and Unworthy of
Love is equally untrue in the middle is
the secure self-concept where you're
able to accept yourself both for your
good and your bad traits however of
course there's a very long road to get
there for many of us and what we're
talking about here is step one which is
just making ourselves aware of the
patterning that we currently have sign
number four that you're probably using
limerence as a means of self-regulation
is that you prefer reflecting on the
interactions you've had with your
limerent object more than you enjoy
actually having them in real time so
again secure connection is all about
showing up with presence and acceptance
of the present moment and being engaged
in real time with the people who were
around so when you are forming a secure
connection with someone the best part of
the connection is actually being with
them in real time and experiencing the
full range of feelings that come up when
you are with them when you are limerent
the best part of a connection is going
home and metabolizing all of the things
the other person said and did into your
fantasy world so maybe they looked at
you a certain way they smiled at you a
certain way and in the moment that made
you feel kind of happy and excited but
if you're limerent the main reason it
made you feel happy and excited was not
just because you felt connected and warm
towards them in the moment it's because
it gave you fodder to go home and
imagine all of the things that they
might have been thinking about you in
that moment to build layers of
interpretation on top of what that smile
or what that kind comment meant to
construct this kind of Rich fantasy
world about what the other person might
be thinking about you and all of those
tiny interpretations you can make about
what they said and did in real time now
is it within the range of secure
relating to wonder about what people
meant when they said or did certain
things absolutely however with limerence
this tendency is taken to an extreme so
you can make almost anything almost any
tiny interaction means something
humongous inside of your own mind so
what you want to be very aware of here
is what is the discrepancy between what
happened in reality and what you made it
mean if what happened in reality is you
had a coffee date with someone and it
seemed like you had a good conversation
and what's happening in your fantasy
world is you are getting married in a
hot air balloon in a foreign country
it's probable that you're experiencing
quite a bit of limerence and another key
tell of limerence is that you tend to be
very anxious about being around the
person because again back to point
number one you're worried that they
might say or do something that breaks
this fantasy that you have about them
and so you might feel a sense of relief
when your real life interaction with
them is over because now you can go back
to where you like to be which is in your
fantasy world as opposed to in a secure
connection you're going to enjoy the
connection the most when it it's
actually happening and when it's not
happening you're not going to put too
much thought into extrapolating upon it
you're just going to maybe look forward
to seeing them next and have a
reasonable amount of curiosity about
what that's going to look like because
the part that you're actually siphoning
the gold from is that co-regulation
which happens in the moment rather than
the self-regulatory process of
fantasizing and sign number five that
you are almost definitely using
limerence as a means of self-regulation
is that your romantic fixation on a
particular person is serving as a
replacement for your genuine needs for
intimacy vulnerability and true
connection with other people so anytime
you feel yourself getting really
limerent getting really fixated on
another person in your connection with
them ask yourself to what extent are my
needs for True deep intimate
person-to-person connection not
necessarily romantically just overall
getting met right now even if I have a
lot of friends or Surface level
connections right now am I actually
getting my deeper needs to be seen and
known on a very deep level and to have
myself mirrored back to me accurately by
someone I have mutual trust with getting
met often the reason we develop really
intense limerence is because we are
terrified of intimacy so I believe the
phenomenon of experiencing limerence is
most prevalent among those who struggle
with toxic shame
this feeling of if anyone really saw me
or really knew me they would be
disgusted by me and I would be abandoned
however I still have that need right my
soul my inner self is aching for that
type of deep connection and the best way
I know at this point to soothe that ache
is to imagine it to create an elaborate
fantasy world in which someone looks at
all of my inner stuff and goes oh this
just in you're actually fine there's
actually nothing to be ashamed of in
there and I know that because I am a
perfect person with absolutely no flaws
so I am perfectly qualified to make that
call for you
and of course the actual antidote to
this is to learn to be present with the
things that we are afraid to look at in
ourselves I have a video called
self-intimacy what it is and how to
Foster it that goes into this process in
depth and talks about how we can learn
to be present with ourselves in such a
way that eventually allows us to welcome
in true intimacy from other people that
we may have been terrified of for our
entire lives however it is a process and
once again the first step in the process
is accurately naming what we're
experiencing if we are fixated on a
romantic fantasy about another person
and we are using it to self-regulate at
the expense of actually going out into
the world and forming real honest secure
relationships with other people that can
eventually provide us with true in the
moment interpersonal co-regulation we're
setting ourselves up for a lot of
disappointment and heartache because
fantasy do not build real relationships
present moment connection which requires
us being willing to sit with our own
uncomfortable emotions that might arise
within present moment connection is what
actually builds deep relationships I
also have a video on interpersonal
intimacy that I will link below but in
the meantime if this is the first time
that you are experiencing this problem
so you're just watching this going holy
crap that's me what do I do here are
some resources that you might find
helpful I've not currently accessed this
one so I can't speak to it specifically
but there is a 12-step program called
love and sex addicts anonymous that
deals quite specifically in its
literature and in its meetings with
fantasy addiction I know there are a lot
of meetings both online as well as in
most major cities so I will link that
resource in the description of this
video some books I recommend Dorothy
tenov is the mother of limerent theory I
will link her book Below in the
description of this video a book that I
found extraordinarily helpful was the
fantasy bond by Robert Firestone own it
doesn't specifically address limerence
however it goes very deep into why we
develop kind of inaccurate
representations of relationships inside
of our own minds in order to avoid pain
and suffering I will link that below and
I will also just throw in any resources
that I can think of that might be
helpful here but the important thing to
keep in mind is that having this problem
is not inherently shameful we develop
coping mechanisms that later become
maladaptive because at some point they
were deeply adaptive for us at some
point in our lives we need it fantasy
love to soothe the pain of not having
real connection of not having our
authentic selves be truly seen and
mirrored back to us by other people and
so we did the best that we could to give
that feeling to ourselves in order to
stay reasonably regulated which is a
need that we have in order to navigate
the world so instead of shaming or
blaming or telling yourself there's
something wrong with you for having this
tendency try thanking yourself for
developing it at the time when you
needed it and then having a conversation
slowly and continuously if you need to
with your inner child about why you no
longer necessarily need this coping
mechanism if it's something that you're
wanting to start letting go of and I
will have future videos talking more
specifically about how to do that and
how to work with limerence in order to
stop using it as a replacement for
genuine connection and co-regulation but
for now that's all I'm going to say on
the topic today as always let me know
what's coming up for you guys as you go
through this what you're thinking
feeling experiencing wondering about I
love you I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children and I will see you back here
again really soon
foreign
[Music]