hey guys heidi preeb here welcome to
this channel if you're new first of all
on this channel most of what we talk
about is personality systems and
attachment theory but really it's just
about figuring out what it is that makes
you tick and what it is that makes other
people tick and then learning how to
bridge that distance more effectively so
when we talk about attachment work a lot
of what we end up talking about is how
to navigate really difficult
interpersonal situations a lot of the
time that's interpersonal conflict
sometimes it's inner conflict but
usually it's some combination of the two
right and one of the best tools that i
have ever found for managing triggers is
what we're going to talk about today so
part of what often makes it very
difficult to have effective conflict
when you have two people who are
insecurely attached in one relationship
or one person is that often especially
in the case of disorganized or fearful
avoidant attachment one or both people
will have unresolved trauma now i want
to set out a big disclaimer here i'm not
a therapist i'm a master's student in
the field of attachment theory so i'm
not qualified to treat trauma but what i
wanted to talk about today is one of the
best resources i've found for managing
what we call an emotional flashback so
most people have heard of ptsd
post-traumatic stress disorder which
often involves flashbacks to traumatic
experiences that an individual will
experience sometimes visually so it's as
if they're truly seeing something
traumatic that happened to them happen
to them all over again or they might
have recurring nightmares or they might
have specific triggers around let's say
certain noises or certain things that
trigger them back into the
re-experiencing of the traumatic event
with complex ptsd we have something
called emotional flashbacks so complex
ptsd and ptsd are not the same condition
i'm not going to go too deep into what
complex ptsd is because that's not
necessarily the focus of this video but
pete walker has an excellent book on it
called complex ptsd from surviving to
thriving he is a therapist and according
to his own bio he has a great deal of
recovering from his own cptsd so he
wrote this book as a resource for people
who experience symptoms of cptsd and
want help with it now i actually
recommend this book for anyone dealing
with any sort of mental health issue
whatsoever point blank and i would group
attachment issues into that category i
really strongly believe that this book
in particular you do not have to
identify as having complex ptsd in order
to get a lot out of it it is just a
great mental health resource all around
and i would truly recommend it to anyone
dealing with any sort of mental health
difficulty now what i found particularly
valuable about this book was something
that he calls the 13 steps for helping
yourself manage an emotional flashback
so with complex ptsd you have something
called emotional flashbacks and when i
heard about what emotional flashbacks
were it really kind of put something
into place in my mind because a lot of
the time when people are discussing kind
of issues that happen to them
interpersonally or even on their own and
they're describing it as a product of
their attachment wounding it's possible
that really strong kind of overwhelming
emotional experiences are a product of
attachment wounding but it's also
possible that what you're experiencing
is an emotional flashback and an
emotional flashback i'm going to read
directly from pete walker's book here is
an intensely disturbing regression or an
amygdala hijack so that's when the part
of your brain that kind of responds with
a fight-or-flight response overwhelms
you and puts your entire nervous system
into that state so you're unable to
think clearly using the parts of your
brain that usually do slow rational
logical thinking to the overwhelming
feeling states of your childhood
abandonment when you're stuck in a
flashback fear shame and or depression
can dominate your experience there are
some common experiences of being in an
emotional flashback you may feel a
little fragile and helpless everything
feels too hard life is too scary being
seen feels excruciatingly vulnerable
your battery seems to be dead in the
worst flashbacks an apocalypse feels
like it will be imminently upon you when
you're trapped in a flashback you are
reliving the worst emotional times of
your childhood everything feels
overwhelming and confusing especially
because there are rarely any visual
components to a cptsd flashback as
goldman's work shows amygdala hijackings
are intense reactions in the emotional
memory part of the brain that override
the rational brain these reactions occur
in the brains of people who have been
triggered into a fight flight freezer
fawn reaction which is something he goes
over extensively in another part of this
book so often that minor events now
trigger them into a panicky state and i
think that quite a bit of the time when
people are let's say experiencing a
really intense attachment
attachment-based conflict they're
actually having an emotional flashback
without realizing it so if you look at
this definition when your kind of
rational logical mind feels like it's
offline when you're reacting from pure
emotion when things feel extremely
heightened and almost like you're going
to die if you don't sort this problem
out this could actually be what's
happening if let's say you are anxiously
attached and you feel as though your
partner is about to abandon you it could
be what's happening if let's say you
have an avoidant attachment style and
you feel like you're getting smothered
or forced to commit to something that
you're not ready for you could actually
be experiencing a situation where you
are flashing back emotionally to a time
in your childhood when you did not have
power or control or the resources to get
yourself out of the problem that you're
facing and reacting to your current
environment as though you were that
powerless child and the reason this is
so important to note is that it is
really difficult if not completely
impossible to make rational
well-informed decisions when you are in
this state so when we're experiencing an
emotional flashback we are not in touch
with our adult selves and it is not a
good time to make major decisions to try
to sort out a conflict or even to figure
out in any extreme depth what's going on
it is time to take a beat and try to
ground ourselves by getting ourselves
out of that flashback and that is the
single best thing in any situation we
can do if we are experiencing an
emotional flashback but part of what
makes attachment healing work so
difficult is that most of us don't have
a how behind that right so we might be
able to recognize the situations in
which we feel out of control of our
emotions out of control of our reactions
but we don't know how to go back to our
more regulated state and so what i'm
going to read you today is pete walker's
13 steps for managing an emotional
flashback i have been using these for
about a year now when i first started it
would take me hours to get out of an
emotional flashback before i was aware i
was having them i would sometimes be in
a flashback for days when i started
using these in some cases i was actually
able to use these 13 steps to get out of
the flashback within a period of like 15
minutes and since then it's kind of
fluctuated based on the intensity of the
trigger i but i just could not recommend
this book in these steps enough as a
resource it is so powerful and truly one
of the only things i found that actually
really helps me when i'm encountering a
trigger and i'm in an emotional
flashback which i absolutely absolutely
experience as a healing fearful avoidant
unquestionably so i guess i should do an
aside and say i don't know if it's like
legal for me to do this and read from
someone else's book for a youtube video
but i want to encourage you please treat
this as an ad for this book go get this
book yesterday it is one of the best if
not the best mental health resource i've
ever come across it was the number one
book on my best books of 2021 list i
cannot sing its praises enough please
get it if you have any curiosity
whatsoever about attachment work
attachment healing emotional triggers it
is a fantastic and very accessible
resource all right here we go 13 steps
for managing emotional flashbacks one
say to yourself i'm having a flashback
flashbacks take you into a timeless part
of the psyche that feels as helpless
hopeless and surrounded by danger as you
were in childhood the feelings and
sensations you're experiencing are past
memories that cannot hurt you now so
this one is simultaneously kind of the
hardest one to do but the most powerful
one because as soon as you can put a
name to your experience you're actually
by virtue of doing that taking yourself
a little bit out of that hijacked state
because when we're in that amygdala
hijacked state i
learned this in anchor management in my
20s we actually need our prefrontal
cortex the part of our brain that
processes language and that can practice
mindfulness in order to name things so
even by the process of naming what
you're going through you're already
helping redirect the blood in your brain
a little bit more towards that
prefrontal area where you're able to be
more aware of what's going on in your
body and mind so simply by telling
yourself i'm having an emotional
flashback and being able to put what's
happening to you into context you are
already taking a step towards changing
your physiological and mental state and
what i encourage you guys to do as you
get better and better at this is take
that step one and really start to notice
what's different when you're in an
emotional flashback versus when you are
not so for me i noticed that when i'm
having an emotional flashback i have
trouble kind of focusing my vision like
it's like the world sort of blurs out
not visually but mentally if that makes
sense like i don't focus on anywhere in
particular i'm so distracted by my
thoughts and my angry body reactions
that i can't really notice where i am or
what's going on it almost is like my
visual field is like shaking and so one
thing that i actually learned to
practice to tell whether or not i was
having an emotional flashback is i would
go into my living room where i have this
very kind of intense pattern on my rug
and i would go okay how much can i
really see the different little patterns
like the little pieces and individual
threads that make up the overall pattern
of this rug when i'm in an emotional
flashback it's almost like it's all just
blurred out and i cannot focus on it
when i am calm and regulated i could sit
there for hours if i were particularly
bored or if i still got stoned and look
at all of the intricate patterns and
really appreciate the artistry of it
when i'm an emotional flashback my brain
would never let me focus on that it's
like the room is spinning around me in
some cases like i'm drunk so that for me
became a cue that i'm in an emotional
flashback and not just feeling let's say
particularly emotional and that's not
part of pete walker's step one that
proactive skill of differentiating
between when you're in an emotional
flashback and when you're not based on
what's happening in either your visual
field or your auditory field some people
might actually feel like they can't hear
anything like people are speaking from
far away when they're having an
emotional flashback it's gonna be a
little bit different for everyone not me
i feel like i could hear a pin drop on
the other side of the world because my
hearing for whatever reason gets really
sharp when i'm in an emotional flashback
but i've talked to other people who have
their hearing dulled so it's definitely
different person to person but that's
something that as you get better at
naming when you're having an emotional
flashback you will also get better at
noticing what's different when you're in
one versus not and the more you learn to
notice that the quicker you're going to
be able to start working the steps and
reversing that physiological process
step two remind yourself i feel afraid
but i'm not in danger i'm safe now here
in the present remember you are now in
the safety of the present far from the
dangers of the past so this is another
one where it feels so simplistic when i
say it now but i promise you it's not
simplistic when you're in an emotional
flashback i like to literally have
concrete reminders of the fact that i am
an adult to help me with this step so i
will look around and go if i were a
child would i have my own apartment
where i can lock the door and no one who
i want to come in will come in
no air go because i'm in an apartment
where i can lock the door and keep
whoever i want out i must be an adult if
i were a child would i make my own
dinner every night no do i have a fridge
full of food and appliances that i use
to make my own dinner every night yes
ergo not a child it sounds so silly but
for me personally it actually helps me
to run through a list of things that
remind me that i am an adult and also
remind me what the meaning behind being
an adult is right we will get to this as
we move further down the list of
emotional flashback management steps but
to me this step is not just about
remembering that you're an adult though
that's the most important part as pete
walker points out it's about recognizing
what that means being an adult means
something and we're going to try to keep
that in our awareness as we keep going
three own your right slash need to have
boundaries remind yourself that you do
not have to allow anyone to mistreat you
you are free to leave dangerous
situations and protest unfair behavior
now this one i think is very
particularly geared towards people of
complex ptsd because complex ptsd often
develops in situations where children
were in some form kind of perpetually
stuck in a situation that was repeatedly
traumatizing them and it felt like it
was never going to end and there was no
escape but this can also be on a smaller
scale what it feels like to be
insecurely attached because your
attachment relationships are with your
caregivers who you need in order to
survive when you were a baby you did not
have the right or the ability to set and
maintain boundaries and so you can
develop this kind of open wound of
feeling like you're unable to have
boundaries if you have any sort of
unprocessed trauma or wounding around
your attachment style and when you are
in an emotional flashback you might
forget that now as an adult you have the
ability to take care of yourself walk
away from bad situations and set
boundaries that you will be safe behind
because you are no longer dependent on
one person to meet all of your survival
needs the way you were as a child but
when you emotionally are stuck in a
flashback to that time it is very easy
to forget that your brain does not think
to stop and go wait a minute i don't
have to continue to engage with this
person it might feel when you have that
amygdala hijack like if you do not get
your way with this person you will
absolutely die so this step is about
recognizing that that is not true it was
true when you were a baby and you had to
get someone's attention or you had to
get your parent to either respond to you
or leave you alone in order for your
survival to be guaranteed that is very
rarely the situation we are still in as
an adult so sometimes at this stage i
just like to practically remind myself
if i were on my own 100 on my own i
would not die today i would go home i
would make food i would put myself to
bed i would have a safe place to be and
if that is not true for you let's say
you're in a dangerous living situation
think of a different situation in which
it could be true is there someone you
could go stay with is there a place you
could go if you really needed to you
don't have to do it but knowing and
being aware of the fact that it is an
option
that exists
is what this step is about reorienting
yourself into the adult world step
number four from pete walker's book
speak reassuringly to the inner child
the child needs to know that you love
him or her unconditionally that he or
she can come to you for comfort and
protection when he or she feels lost and
scared so if you have never done any
inner child work i really recommend the
book homecoming by john bradshaw it
walks you through the re-parenting of
your inner child process and helps you
get a really good idea of what people
are talking about when they use the term
inner child as well as how you can use
visualization exercises to help you get
better in touch with the parts of you
that still feel kind of vulnerable and
afraid and in need of help as an adult
and this step is all about that it's all
about recognizing which parts of
yourself are still very vulnerable and
that you can bring your adult self
online to help work with right so for a
while when i started realizing and
recognizing what i was going through as
emotional flashbacks i started literally
picturing a smaller version of myself
and putting all of the strong emotions
that i was feeling onto her and watching
her play them out and then i would think
if this were a literal child feeling
this way what would i do to comfort them
what would i be aware that their needs
are and how could i make sure that i'm
keeping them safe and protected first
and foremost usually it meant
immediately removing myself from
whatever situation i was in that was
upsetting that inner child and then
figuring out how to give her healthy
boundaries to exist within as i
navigated that situation from my adult
self once i had calmed down and the
flashback was over but it's kind of cool
because everyone has different
relationships to their inner child right
because your inner child is just a part
of who you are so in this process you
probably are going to learn a lot about
who you are what your needs are when
you're struggling emotionally and that's
a skill that's going to help you across
a wide range of situations definitely
not just when you're having an emotional
flashback step number five deconstruct
eternity thinking this is so important
in childhood fear and abandonment felt
endless again that is specific to cptsd
but it might apply to people who have
attachment wounding as well
a safer future was unimaginable remember
this flashback will pass as it always
has before so what i like to do at this
step and this is one that is always a
bit of a game changer for me is i like
to think of what it will be like later
when i'm no longer having a flashback so
sometimes i look around the room and i
go okay right now it is 4pm and i'm in
an emotional flashback at 8pm if the
flashback is gone what will i be doing
well maybe i'll be sitting down and i'll
have the tv on and i will be curled up
in the couch in a ball and i'll have my
pajamas on and i'll be cozy and even
just imagining what it will be like when
the flashback is over what i will feel
in my body when the flashback is over
how the room will physically look
different to me when the flashback is
over and i can tune into things this is
usually the step that is the most
powerful for me sometimes i put down the
book after this and i don't need to do
the other eight steps but i think you
know it's in the book different people
are going to find different steps more
or less powerful so for whatever reason
this is the one that does it for me
because it's all about reorienting
yourself and reminding yourself that
this will pass this is not your
permanent state and it can be really
hard to remember that in an emotional
flashback you can truly think this is
how i always am it's just that right now
i'm feeling exceptionally strong
feelings and of course there's an
element of truth to that you are always
you in every state but it's helpful to
actively remind yourself that in a
different physiological state you might
look at this problem differently and as
much as possible try to ground yourself
in the remembering of what a different
physiological state is remember past
flashbacks that time has helped you move
on from and know that no matter what the
outcome of this one is it will pass they
always do six remind yourself that you
are in an adult body with allies skills
and resources to protect you that you
never had as a child feeling small and
fragile is a sign of a flashback so this
is really interesting because which one
of those things feels most important to
you is going to be a little bit
different for everyone but it might even
help if you're not in an emotional
flashback at this moment to sit down or
if you are and write down which allies
you have which people in your life are
there to support you and give you help
through the problems that you're
experiencing write as many people as you
can think of even if they would only
help you in the smallest way write down
a list of your skills that you have that
you did not have as a child that as an
adult you have honed and now give you
greater access to independence and then
write down the physical resources that
you have this can be either things you
own or it can be things that you can
access services you can access people
you can reach out to therapists or
mental health services that might be
able to help you when you are struggling
a child does not have the skills and
resources that they need nor do they
usually have the allies to get them out
of a bad situation but adults do it
doesn't mean that all of those things
are present for you in this exact moment
but the fact that you have access to
them in a calm state can allow you to
remember that when you need help you
will be able to get it and that's very
different from the way that you may have
felt as a child seven ease back into
your body fear launches you into heady
worrying or numbing and spacing out
a gently ask your body to relax feel
each of your major muscle groups and
softly encourage them to relax
tighten muscles send false danger
signals to your brain
b breathe deeply and slowly
holding your breath also signals danger
c
slow down
rushing presses your brain's fighter
flight response button
d find a safe place to unwind and soothe
yourself wrap yourself in a blanket hold
a pillow or stuffed animal lie down on
your bed or in a closet or in a bath or
take a nap
e
feel the fear in your body without
reacting to it
fear is just an energy in your body it
cannot hurt you if you do not run from
it so again that's a lot and everyone is
going to find a different part of that
particularly helpful but what this step
is all about is just returning you to
your senses to the awareness of the
current situation that you're in and to
ease your body back into the process of
reacting to what's actually happening in
your environment rather than reacting to
an old environment that's no longer
happening so this is all about tuning
yourself back in and reorienting
yourself to the present moment moment to
moment i find this one difficult
sometimes because when i am in an
emotional flashback my body has a really
hard time calming down so sometimes
instead of trying to do this one
perfectly like i will almost never be
able to get to the point where by step
seven i'm able to take a nap i will just
notice which of these things are
actively making the situation worse so
like he says in the book when you are
holding your breath that is what i very
often do when i'm stuck in kind of fight
or flight all i have to do is release
that breath and make a point to breathe
all the way out before i breathe back in
same with muscle tightness right all i
have to do sometimes is slack in my jaw
let it kind of hang open a little bit
and then let my shoulders kind of relax
a little bit so the bare minimum you
have to do is just stop those things
that are actively sending the danger
signals back into your brain you're at
least that way giving yourself a
fighting chance at not making the
flashback intensify eight resist the
inner critics drasticizing and
catastrophizing
a use thought stopping to halt the
critic's endless exaggerations of danger
and it's constant planning to control
the uncontrollable refuse to shame hate
or abandon yourself channel the anger of
self-attack into saying no to your
critic's unfair self-criticism
b use thought substitution and thought
correction to replace negative thinking
with a memorized list of your qualities
and accomplishments so this is one that
it helps to read the cptsd book
basically to understand what he's saying
because he is drawing on concepts that
he wrote about earlier on in the book
but essentially what this is talking
about is just getting a hold of that
critical part of our minds that is maybe
mad at us that this is happening again
mad at us for having a flashback mad at
us for not knowing how to handle it
better or maybe we've already kind of
blown up or frozen in a situation where
it feels like we really needed to have
or it was important for us to have a
different reaction this step is all
about finding a way to stop that shame
because the shame is going to make the
flashback spiral and intensify and have
self-compassion so in his book which
again recommend getting so highly pete
walker talks about specific tactics you
can use to do that so he does recommend
at some point writing down a list of
your qualities and accomplishments that
as an adult you have sourced for
yourself and i found that surprisingly
helpful i didn't think it would be
helpful and then going into it i was
like oh yeah there really is a lot that
differentiates my adult self from my
child's self and here is proof of it
here is concrete inarguable evidence
that i'm now capable of things i once
was not capable of and that can be very
helpful to remember in moments where
we're berating ourselves because we're
overly identified with the childhood
versions of ourselves step nine allow
yourself to grieve flashbacks are
opportunities to release old unexpressed
feelings of hurt fear and abandonment
validate and soothe your child's past
experience of helplessness and
hopelessness
healthy grieving can turn your tears
into self-compassion and your anger into
self-protection so in my experience but
this might not be everyone's experience
this is a step that gets easier the more
you go down the attachment healing road
i found grief to be almost completely
inaccessible to me for like at least the
first year that i was working really
intensively on my attachment style
now i am moving through it almost
constantly
it is hella annoying and i wish i could
stop it but that feeling of realizing
what it is in these moments that feels
so intense that is a reflection of a
need you never got met in your childhood
is a really crucial element i believe
for eventually being able to diminish
the frequency of emotional flashbacks
potentially but also the frequency with
which we project them onto other people
so the less aware we are of which
emotions are kind of buried alive inside
of us as john bolby would put it the
more likely we are to re-experience
those feelings left right and center and
not know where they're coming from or
how to resolve them but the more we're
able to connect what we're feeling to
the early experiences of when we first
felt those feelings and the more we
grieve those experiences and find a way
to fit them into the story of our lives
in a way that helps our adult self
understand that that is now over that's
what attachment healing is right it's
being able to recontextualize our early
experiences so that we are no longer
playing them out in our adult lives so
this step is extremely important but
also if you can't do it right away
that's not abnormal it will come the
more that you practice 10. cultivate
safe relationships and seek support take
time alone when you need it but don't
let shame isolate you feeling shame
doesn't mean that you are shameful
educate your intimates about flashbacks
and ask them to help you talk and feel
your way through them this is an awesome
step
um this step also took an incredibly
long period of time for me i now have at
least one person i know i can call when
i'm having an emotional flashback who
understands the language and who can
talk me through it in an educated way
and that education came from me
educating them for me practicing these
steps enough times that i kind of
understood at each step of the process
what i'm going to need and how to kind
of ease myself out of it in a gentle way
and having someone there with you who
can reflect that back to you if you have
such a person you can call is
absolutely invaluable it is a truly
special experience because sometimes
let's say we're not even at step one
right we are having an emotional
flashback and we cannot in that moment
name it for what it is we don't know
that's what's happening but if we have
talked to the people we're close to and
if we tell them about what an emotional
flashback is they might be able to
recognize when we're in one and gently
ask us do you think it's possible you're
having an emotional flashback right now
and that alone might be able to launch
us into step one right i also just love
the line feeling shame doesn't mean you
are shameful that is one that i think
everyone but especially everyone who
suffers from attachment wounding of any
sort needs to hear about a thousand
times a day just because you are feeling
shame does not mean you are right about
what you're experiencing right you can
feel shame over something that someone
else would look directly at and be like
oh i like that about you or i don't
think that's a bad thing at all right or
in most cases that's just completely
neutral so we think that our shame is
telling us a story about who we are but
it's not it's often just a matter of
what we've been conditioned to feel
shame around and that's completely
different than us being fundamentally
flawed as human beings right so
remembering feeling shame does not mean
that that's an accurate representation
of reality feeling shame does not mean
you are shameful is crucial i actively
repeat that to myself often when having
an emotional flashback it's a really
really important piece of this puzzle
11. learn to identify the type of
triggers that lead to flashbacks avoid
unsafe people places activities and
triggering mental processes practice
preventative maintenance with these
steps when triggering situations are
unavoidable so this is twofold right for
the most part as much as we're able to
avoid triggers i do think that's a good
way to go there are a lot of triggers we
can just straight up avoid without too
much consequence a lot of the time and i
think it's worth as much as possible as
long as we are not avoiding things that
are kind of crucial to our health and
well-being to build our lives around the
avoidance of major triggers i don't
think that that's necessarily such a bad
thing especially because probably a lot
of things that trigger us into
flashbacks are kind of unhealthy anyways
if you know what i mean like let's say
someone screaming at you puts you back
into an emotional flashback can you try
to not surround yourself with people who
are likely to scream at you that's
probably a good preventative measure
that not only circumnavigates a
flashback but also probably starts
putting you in healthier situations
across the board but the second part of
this practicing preventative maintenance
when you know you're going to be in a
situation that might trigger a flashback
is also incredibly important going into
a situation thinking i might be about to
have an emotional flashback and i'm
going to need to stop take space and do
the steps when that's the case is very
different than going into a situation
thinking this is going to be sunny and
rosy and fantastic and then suddenly
finding yourself in an emotional
flashback and not knowing what's
happening and that probably will happen
it probably just will many times over
the course of your life even if you get
good at doing these steps and that's
okay too right you have not failed if
you have not identified every potential
scenario that might trigger you and
avoided it it is definitely definitely
unavoidable to sometimes get triggered
accidentally so please don't be
perfectionistic about this step i like
to think of it just as as much as
humanly possible how do you prepare
yourself for the potential of this
happening but there will always be an
element that is out of our control step
12 figure out what you're flashing back
to flashbacks are opportunities to
discover validate and heal your wounds
from past abuse and abandonment they
also point to our still unmet
developmental needs and can provide you
with motivation to get them met this
one's interesting again this might come
later on in the process for you it might
be something that having therapy really
helps you with if you can work with your
therapist to figure out what it is that
these emotions you're feeling are kind
of indicating and in my experience
sometimes it's very surprising or seems
to make no sense like i was having this
experience one time at an airport where
i was having one of the most intense
emotional flashbacks i've ever
experienced in my life and i fly all the
time i'm frequently in airports airports
usually do not freak me out but because
of a trigger that went off i was deep in
this emotional flashback and i was
having this feeling of like being three
feet tall and everyone in the airport
being seven feet tall and feeling like i
am a little tiny baby in a sea of giants
and i need someone to come help me
navigate this environment and it was so
bizarre because it was like this
experience of being three years old and
i'd never really been aware of the fact
that that's kind of how i feel sometimes
in an emotional flashback and it was so
bizarre and i don't know particularly
when the first time i felt that way was
what in my childhood that is flashing
back to but it's very interesting to
note that it's very interesting to just
notice which experiences you're feeling
like it's related to at that point in
time i felt like i was lost in a mall
and i needed my parent to come find me
because i was not going to be able to
navigate this foreign environment by
myself and again that's not a normal
feeling for me that's a very distinctly
flashback experience so i don't know
what that in particular was flashing
back to but it's valuable feedback to
figure out what parts of yourself and
maybe how old you might have been in the
original experiences that you're
flashing back to it gives you kind of a
guide for where you might want to start
working in the therapy room or on your
own afterwards once the flashback is
over and these really can be pointing
towards powerful memories that have
greatly influenced the way that you show
up in the world so they're worth paying
attention to and finally step 13 be
patient with a slow recovery process it
takes time to be in the present and to
become de-adrenalized and considerable
time in the future to gradually decrease
the intensity duration and frequency of
flashbacks real recovery is a gradually
progressive process often two steps
forward one step back not in attained
salvation fantasy don't beat yourself up
for having a flashback and that is so
important
so important this does not mean never
take responsibility for anything that
happens when you're in a flashback state
later on once you've regulated yourself
your adult self can deal with any damage
that was caused in the meantime right
but when you're having a flashback your
job is to be kind to yourself to be
aware of what's going on and to help you
get back to a state where you do not
feel so disoriented and distressed
because it's really hard to solve any
problems when you are feeling that way
so i could go on about this topic
forever honestly i want to just keep
reading this chapter to you and then i
want to keep reading the rest of the
book to you because it's so amazing and
just such a
compassionate and practical approach to
dealing with really difficult emotional
triggers which is why i recommend even
if you do not identify as having complex
ptsd and there is always a chance you'll
find out that you're wrong about that
assumption when you read it i really
recommend picking this book up and using
it as a resource i carried this book
around with me for two months of my life
everywhere i went i always had it in my
backpack i would forego putting other
things in my backpack if i didn't have
room so that i could go to the bathroom
and read these 13 emotional flashback
steps if it happened to me in any
situation because when i started
practicing them i was blown away by how
powerful they were when i really took
the time to embody each step and i
wholeheartedly believe that if you apply
these 13 steps to any situation where
you feel your attachment wounds getting
triggered it is highly likely that
they're going to help you return to
equilibrium without making the situation
worse than it needs to be all right i
think that is all that i have to say for
today since this video is already pretty
lengthy but let me know what you guys
think of these steps in the comments if
you start practicing them let me know
what you're finding works or doesn't
work as well for you and just like i
provided a ton of commentary through
this on what i found really worked for
me on various steps let us know what
worked for you as well because the more
interpretations of this we get the more
we can crowdsource solutions for finding
our way out of these difficult moments
right
all right as always i love you guys i
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and i will see you back here again soon
[Music]