To be well regulated basically just
means to be comfortable with our raw
emotions as they arrive in our body. To
be able to label them to some extent
that is helpful for us in making sense
of them. And also to be able to express
them directly without too much shame or
rumination in the way. So, for example,
to be able to notice when something is
making us angry and to be able to just
say it in the moment that we're feeling
it or to notice that we're feeling sad
or down and to give ourselves the space
that our body needs to be a little bit
more downregulated for a period of time.
So, having good emotional regulation
skills is not about feeling one thing
all of the time. It is in fact about
welcoming in all of our emotions and
being able to work with them effectively
so that we are not holding chronic
tension or stress in our body by virtue
of trying to avoid, get rid of, or
change certain emotions that really just
want to be expressed.