hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
today on this channel we're talking
about
perfectionism and this is part of the
broader topic that we're exploring this
month which is self-esteem and what
we're going to go into today is how
perfectionism often keeps us away from
both a healthy sense of self-esteem and
also deep authentic connection with the
people around us we have a ton of stuff
to pack into this video so I'm going to
get right into it for the first half
we're going to go over how
perfectionistic Tendencies can create a
self-fulfilling prophecy where
essentially if you're telling yourself
the story people will only accept me or
like me or want to be close to me if I
am showing up perfectly that thought
process can actually become a vicious
cycle where it starts feeling more and
more as though that thing is the truth
but it's not and then in the latter half
of the video we're going to go over what
it looks like to have have a really
strong sense of internal perfectionism
so this idea that I will not accept me
unless and until I am perfect and how
that belief tends to keep us away from
having really meaningful and deeply
fulfilling lives so we're going to go
over how to break both of these patterns
and challenge our own thinking in these
areas in order to get ourselves more of
what we want out of our lives and less
of what we don't want and you might have
both of the beliefs we're going to to
talk about today you may have only one
or the other but I think it's highly
likely that even if there's one you
initially recognize yourself in you
probably have some element of the other
as well so I encourage you to watch both
halves of this video just to see which
one resonates a little bit more or if
these two are actually heavily impacting
each other so we're going to start with
the interpersonal side of things so this
belief that I will only be accepted if I
am perfect so let's look at what
happened when we go into a situation
believing that this is the truth that we
will be rejected if we show any sign of
weakness or imperfection in front of
other people so when we live with this
belief essentially the question we are
asking ourselves in every scenario we
enter into is am I able to show up
perfectly here and if the answer is yes
in the rare scenario where let's say we
believe that we have truly mastered a
skill or worked so hard at it that we
now feel relaxed when we are performing
it what happens is we give off a very
easeful and congruent energy because
we're not freaking out and trying to
hide ourselves or trying to Shield other
people from seeing our true selves we
are going into a situation wanting to be
seen because we believe that we have
achieved Perfection or at the least
something so close to Perfection that
whatever tiny mistakes we make We
Believe others will will forgive us for
so we show up to those situations with
presence and dignity and anytime we are
showing up to a situation with presence
and dignity we are naturally giving off
an energy that makes others comfortable
because we're essentially communicating
to them through the way that we're
behaving hey I'm okay you don't have to
worry about me you don't have to provide
me with self-esteem I'm not trying to
get anything out of you I feel secure in
how I am and so you can just be you and
I'll just be me so showing up with that
energy puts the people around you at
ease and when the people around us are
at ease they tend to respond quite
favorably to us and that brings you
right back into that belief I must be
perfect to be liked because look at what
happened when you went into something
perfectly people responded favorably to
you and of course if you could do
everything perfectly all of the time
this belief would be no problem however
even the most perfectionistic people
amongst us usually only feel like
they're getting things perfectly right
an incredibly small proportion of the
time so what happens the other
99.99% of the time in your life what
happens when you go into a situation and
you ask yourself the question can I do
this perfectly and the answer is no now
you're probably going to pick one of two
options
one is to retreat so to go home to
withdraw to isolate and to keep trying
to perfect that skill before you go back
into a situation where you need to
attempt to use it or if you can't avoid
the situation isolation and withdrawal
is not an option you might go into the
situation with defensive and guarded
energy so you have that belief that if
anybody sees the fact that I'm not
currently perfect at this thing they're
going to judge me and they're going to
reject me so I need to be on high alert
I need to kind of push away any
questions people have that might expose
me as imperfect if I were to answer them
honestly and I need to find a way to
throw people off the trail so that they
don't see that I'm not perfect at this
thing or we might just show up feeling
super bad about ourselves and have this
energy to us that we really need other
people's validation that it's okay to be
where we are but in any case we're going
to be showing up with really incongruent
energy where we're feeling one way but
trying to act a different way and when
we're showing up with in congruent
energy other people tend to pick up on
that even if they can't put a finger on
why they usually know there's something
about the way that this person is
holding themselves and the words that
they're saying or the kind of energy
that they're giving off and the words
that they're saying that don't quite
match up when we have that in congruent
mismatched energy it tends to make
people feel uncomfortable in our
presence and when people are
uncomfortable in our presence we tend to
have a harder time connecting with them
because if we're being inauthentic it's
hard to authentically connect with
someone else what happens is once again
it goes right back into reinforcing that
belief that I need to be perfect in
order to be accepted because we are
misattributing our lack of acceptance
from other people to the fact that we
weren't doing something perfectly as
opposed to what it might actually have
been which is that we were not behaving
in a way that was congruent and
authentic and that tends to turn people
off of course this will not be true in
all scenarios but I find that it is true
in so many more scenarios than most of
us realize particularly those of us who
air perfectionistic realize it is
unbelievable because the thing that most
of us don't realize especially most of
us who grew up with more perfectionistic
patterning is that people are not
attracted to other people's Perfection
if people are attracted to other
people's Perfection it's probably just
because they are also wounded in a way
that leads them to believe that they
need to be perfect and they need to be
with another person who is perfect in
order to be universally admired by
people because that's what they know
love to be but people who actually have
more secure patterning and and who are
more grounded in what feels meaningful
in life understand that all humans are
imperfect including themselves so people
who are able to display their
vulnerabilities and the things that
they're struggling with and who can
signal the areas in which they need help
as well as can stand strong in the areas
where they do have natural aptitudes
that combination of traits becomes very
attractive because it's signaling hey
I'm human and so I'm not going to expect
you to be not human and we can
co-regulate around both our strengths
and our weaknesses so we're going to
take a look at that cycle we just did
with perfectionism and we're going to
run it through a more secure belief
system so if we have that belief that
others are attracted to my presence and
my Humanity so my authenticity now what
happens when we go into a situation and
ask ourselves the question can I do this
perfectly is that it's a much simpler
cycle just like the perfectionist the
secure person who asks themselves can I
do this perfectly in the rare scenario
where the answer feels like a yes or
pretty close to a yes they show up with
presence and dignity they're honest
about their strengths and they have no
trouble showing other people where they
shine and because they're present and
authentic in those moments they tend to
make others feel comfortable which
increases the likelihood of connection
with people but but what's interesting
is that the exact same thing happens on
the other side of this chart so when the
more secure leaning person asks thems
can I do this perfectly and the answer
is no what happens next is they show up
with presence and dignity so they're
able to admit what they're struggling
with or what they're not great at yet
and they don't need other people to
either savior them from that scenario so
to be strong enough on their behalf that
they don't need to develop that skill
nor do they need people to see them as
perfect so it's okay for them to just
admit I want to do this thing I want to
get better at it but I'm just not there
yet here's where I actually am and they
can kind of commiserate with people over
their challenges and struggles and
things that they aren't getting right
yet and because they're able to stay in
their sense of dignity and stay present
through that process once again they're
making others feel comfortable because
they're behaving congruently they're not
pretending to be anywhere other than
where they're at and they're not
pretending to be feeling anything other
than exactly what they're feeling and so
again there's a much higher likelihood
that connection is going to happen which
reroots directly back to that original
belief others are attracted to my
presence and humanity and this isn't to
say it's always going to be true right
there might be a subset of people who
are absolutely turned off by the fact
that a secure person feels comfortable
with themselves but that's going to be a
much smaller percentage of people than
those who believe that people have to be
perfect in order to accept them so in
this model there's going to be a much
greater percentage of people who you're
able to connect with under these
circumstances than there is in the first
model I'll say it one more time very
simply and plainly before we move on
people do not form deep pervasive
connections with each other over Mutual
Perfections around people who perceive
to be perfect what we tend to feel like
is intimidated and inhibited or
desperate for validation and neither of
those things are the basis of deep
connection the basis of deep connection
is I see you and can hold you in the
entirety of your humanity and you see me
and can hold me in the entirety of mine
so if those are the types of
relationships we want ones that actually
have lasting power we have to drop this
idea that we get there by behaving
perfectly what we are actually doing if
we are refusing to show up in any way
other than perfectly is we are driving
away all of the secure people which
might be the total opposite of what we
think we want now we're going to go into
the second half of the video which is
about how we get in our own way when it
comes to the drive for Perfection what
I'm going to make a very clear
distinction around here is the
difference between perfectionism and
excellence so Excellence might mean that
you are doing something really well that
you've developed a truly exceptional
skill in some area and what I'm going to
argue here is that excellence and
Perfection are often at odds with each
other so often when we are chasing
Perfection we are actually sabotaging
our own chances at achieving excellence
and the reason for that is because the
opposite of perfectionism is not failure
okay the opposite of perfectionism is
the Attunement to
reality when we are focused on achieving
Perfection what we are doing is spending
all of our mental real estate attuning
to an ideal so imagining what we want to
be true imagining every nitty-gritty
idea of what would be perfectly in place
if the thing that we desperately want to
be true were happening and we are
spending all of our time rotating around
and examining that ideal and what we are
not doing when we are spending all of
that time attuned to our ideal is
attuning to reality so looking at where
we actually are in life what skills we
actually have which opportunities are
available to us right now within the
life that we are living and we're not
taking the realistic chances for growth
and development that are available to us
at the level level we are currently at
and it is precisely the art of Being
attuned to our environment being
realistic in our self appraisal and
figuring out which skills we can build
based on where we're starting from that
lay down the groundwork for achieving
Excellence later on because every step
of the way we're doing a reality check
we're checking does this goal actually
fit in with my other priorities and
values so if if I want this thing out of
my work as I'm working towards it and as
I'm taking steps up that ladder am I
feeling more satisfied with the overall
quality of my life or is this actually
interfering with things like my close
relationships or my health or other
things that really matter to me so along
the way we're doing constant checks to
make sure that what we think we want is
in practice in reality what we actually
want and what actually improves the
quality of Our Lives versus when we are
so attuned to the ideal of something
we're not doing that checking on root
we're just telling ourselves the story
when I get there and I finally allow
myself to be present because we cannot
be attuned to an ideal and present at
the same time when I get there and I'm
present everything will feel perfect and
I don't think I need to tell any of us
how much that sets oneself up for
disaster when we actually get to that
place and allow ourselves to settle into
presence for the first time in a very
long time especially if we've allowed a
lot of the stuff that keeps Our Lives
feeling meaningful fall to the Wayside
in pursuit of that ideal that moment of
coming into presence is going to be a
very harsh one in that case so what
we're going to go over next is five
questions you can ask yourself to figure
out what you're really trying to achieve
out of your perfectionism and if there's
a way to do it differently that could
bring you way more meaning contentment
and satisfaction on Route so the first
question I recommend asking yourself is
which base level skills are really
important for achieving the kind of life
that I want that I am completely
ignoring so this is essentially the act
of figuring out where your blind spots
are so I'll give an example of this the
other day I saw this real on Instagram
that I thought was such a perfect
example of this where there's this
really buff really fit guy lifting
weights and the voiceover was fairly
sarcastically saying the reason you
don't have love is because your muscles
aren't big enough it's not your terrible
personality it's not your lack of any
discernable goals in life it's not
because you have no idea how to talk to
women it's because your muscles aren't
big enough just keep lifting and I
thought that that was such a perfect
example of how perfectionistic
patterning can keep us completely and
totally off track when it comes to what
would actually get us what we want in
life because I find that something
that's frequently happening when we get
really obsessed with doing one thing
perfectly is that we are expecting that
one thing to be able to compensate for
all of the other skills we would
actually need to develop to achieve what
we want to achieve that are more
threatening for us to look at so we're
putting way way way too much weight on
one area and totally neglecting skills
that would take much further so a really
good way to check ourselves on this is
to ask ourselves who has the thing I
want despite not being perfect at the
thing that I'm telling myself I need to
be perfect at in order to get that thing
so if you have to use that very clear
example that belief that you have to
have a perfect body to be in a happy
relationship ask yourself who can I
think of who does not have a perfect
body but who still in a happy
relationship and which skills do they
have that I lack is it possible that
that points to something very
fundamental that I am lacking because
it's easier to just focus on getting
bigger muscles or losing 20 pounds or
whatever it is is it possible that
actually the reason I'm not in love or
in the perfect relationship is because I
don't really know how to show my
vulnerabilities and so I don't know how
to connect with people in a holistic way
and is it possible that that person I'm
looking at with the imperfect body does
in fact know how to connect with people
in that way is it possible that's a much
bigger reason why that person is in a
happy relationship and I'm not what
might I be ignoring that is actually
very fundamental here so if we're really
serious about figuring this out it might
not hurt to ask the people around us hey
here's this thing I've been trying to
achieve for a really long time do you
have ideas about why I'm not achieving
this goal can you point me to any areas
I might need to work on that might be a
blind spot for me and this is an
incredibly vulnerable thing to ask right
so we want to make sure we're going to
people who we trust but the idea here is
that generally we're going to focus on
the things that are not shame Bound for
us and we're going to naturally neglect
the things that are shame Bound for us
and if you don't know what I mean when I
say that term I will put a link in the
description of this video to another one
I have that goes over what it looks like
to have a shame bound emotion or part of
your personality but this is an
important point because I find that
perfectionism is often a distraction
from that which is shame bound within us
again if I think that my vulnerabilities
are disgusting and Despicable and it
doesn't even occur to me that that could
be the thing that actually draws someone
closer to me I'm going to get really
obsessed with some other area that I
think it's perfectly healthy and even
admirable for me to work on and I'm
going to convince myself that that is
the only thing I need to do I just need
to get richer or fitter or whatever it
is because I think there's nothing
shameful about being rich and fit but I
do think that there's something shameful
about being vulnerable or having
interpersonal needs and those might be
the things that actually connect me to
other people you need to be willing to
look at where your blind spots are and
do some work in those areas next
question to ask yourself that naturally
follows out of this one what would I
have to grieve if I were to give up my
attachment to this ideal so often when
we have that attachment to an ideal that
we call
perfectionism what we actually have is a
fantasy that we could achieve X without
y I could have the perfect relationship
without ever being vulnerable or I could
have the perfect relationship without
ever feeling lonely or misunderstood or
anxious because I don't want to have to
learn the skills for tolerating any of
those emotions which I need to learn the
skills for if I want to have an
excellent
relationship I could have the perfect
job without ever making any mistakes or
ever looking stupid or ever having to
ask for help and a kind of supplementary
question to this one that you can ask
yourself to really get to the core of it
is if I knew that I were never going
going to achieve perfection in this area
what would I feel what fantasy would I
be letting go of and what grief would
come up so if I knew that for the rest
of my life my body was going to look the
exact way that it looks right now how
would I feel what fantasy would I have
to grieve maybe the fantasy that getting
the perfect body would mean that I was
happy forever or accepted by everybody
forever or never felt any shame again
if I knew for sure that my partner was
never going to change this is for those
of us who air codependent what would I
have to MN maybe I would have to mourn
the fantasy that I am this God who is
capable of fixing other people's trauma
and pain if my status in life were never
going to change I was never going to
become richer than I am right now what
fantasy would you have to mourn is there
a Salvation fantasy you're holding on to
about what being admired by other people
would mean about the quality of your
character you cannot achieve your way
out of any of the most basic human
experiences and feelings that are
inherent to living and often when we
start letting go of our obsession with
perfection and ideals what happens is we
have to mourn the fact that we are human
beings and we cannot Escape our humanity
and all of the hard feelings that are
consistently a part of it no matter how
badly we want to which brings us to the
third question what would it look like
for me to show up congruently at the
level I am currently at so if I were not
trying to cover up or hide any of my
imperfections but I were actually trying
to live in a way that is honest and
authentic and display my imperfections
and ask for things like feedback and
help what would that look like what part
of me would the people around me see
that they normally don't see what would
I know about me that I currently don't
know or that I currently try to keep my
head in the sand about what would I no
longer be denying about my own needs my
own desires and my own skills the cool
thing about this is that the more
congruently we show up in the world and
the more honestly we display ourselves
to other people the more we expedite our
own growth and development because now
that we've accepted where we're at it
means we are open to the lessons that
are available to us at the level we're
playing at being willing to admit both
what we don't know yet what we're not
good at yet and how we feel about that
allows us the best possible chance at
actually developing the skills that we
need to move forward in the areas of
life that matter to us and so very
quickly we start to master these
incredibly basic skills that we may have
been missing for for the entirety of Our
Lives because we were keeping them shame
bound so really spending some time with
that question in what ways am I not
showing up authentically honestly and
congruently in my life and what would my
life look like if I did is a really
important question to spend some time
with the next question I want to
encourage you to ask yourself and this
is one of my favorite questions of all
time is what do I wholeheartedly with my
entire self enjoy progressing towards so
when I am picking my goals what I often
ask myself is if I died halfway to
achieving this goal would I die happy
and content with how I spent my time
pursuing this goal so if I'm thinking of
something that it's going to take me 5
years to achieve and I Die 2 and 1 half
years in would I have genuinely and
wholeheartedly love the last two years
of my life would I have felt and engaged
and inspired on route to this goal to
the point where it doesn't actually
matter to me all that much on a deep
level whether I ever get there if the
answer is no you are going to want to
either change your goal or change your
approach to that goal so if I do think
that I genuinely want something but I
hate working towards it is there a way I
could find using creative thinking to
work towards this thing so that I
authentically love and stay present
inside of the process often the answer
is yes and if the answer is no there is
no way for you to enjoy that process is
it possible you have picked the wrong
goal this question is kind of
encouraging ourselves to boil our lives
down to the fundamentals of what feels
meaningful to us on a day-to-day basis
and when we are living from a place
where we are regularly engaging with the
fundamental aspect of what makes a life
feel meaningful for us we generally do
not have to dissociate that much into
fantasies about a perfect future because
the life that we're actually living
feels fulfilling while we're living it
so it feels better to be present than it
does to be somewhere else in our minds
imagining a different life and this
bleeds very naturally into the last
question I want to propose or put on the
table today which is if there were no
perfection in this one area or in life
in general if I knew that there was
never going to be a way to get the
perfect relationship the perfect career
the perfect body the perfect personality
which imperfections would I most enjoy
spending my time on so this question is
inspired by Mark Manson who's a
self-help author who I grew up reading
quite a bit of and one of the biggest
takeaways I ever got away from his work
was that to lead a good life you have to
focus not on the Big Shiny perfect thing
things you want but on which problems
you enjoy having because that is the
reality of Life most of our life is
going to be spent just trying to solve
problems and if we love the problems
that we are trying to solve we don't
actually have to get them solved in
order for us to have a really meaningful
and satisfying life so where a lot of us
go wrong when we're striving for
Perfection is we're assuming that the
options are being in a horrible mess
that we hate or achieving perfection
and so we create scenarios where that's
true because we're not striving for
what's in between which is engaging with
problems that we enjoy so if I knew that
I was never going to get the perfect job
that made me happy forever or the
perfect relationship that never had any
problems or the perfect body that
everybody else coveted forever what
would I want to spend my time on anyway
what exercise do I just genuinely enjoy
doing enough that it doesn't matter if
it ever leads to the perfect body that's
the exercise that's actually going to
keep you reasonably healthy and in shape
for your entire life what work do I
genuinely enjoy doing even if it doesn't
get the type of recognition that I want
it to get that's the work that's
genuinely going to feel fulfilling for
you for the rest of your life what kind
of person do I enjoy being with so much
that I don't mind if we sometimes fight
or really get frustrated with each other
that's the kind of person you're
probably going to be happy with for the
rest of your life so this is an area
where I had a lot of perfectionistic
Tendencies earlier on in my life I
thought that having the perfect
relationship meant that two people could
perfect their communication skills
enough that nothing ever went wrong and
there was never any fighting or drama or
arguing so I remember the first time I
got into a romantic relationship after
having done a lot of work on my
attachment stuff and I met someone else
who had also done a ton of work on their
attachment stuff and I kind of thought
to myself great we are never going to
have a stupid argument or a petty
conflict because to be securely attached
means that none of that stuff ever
happens again and I'm sure you can
imagine my surprise the first time we
had our first absolutely stupid and
immature fight and I remember feeling so
frust frustated and going this was not
supposed to happen in this relationship
when people are secure it's supposed to
mean that you never have an argument
that is anything other than perfectly
mature and where everybody is anything
other than perfectly regulated the whole
time and it definitely means that I'm
never supposed to have that feeling of
well maybe we should just break up and
so what I did was I went right back into
my perfectionistic ideal and I went I'm
going to learn everything that I may
possibly have done wrong here in terms
of communication and I'm going to get
perfect at it so I went out and bought
all of the books that John gotman who's
regarded as kind of the leading expert
in relationship communication had ever
written and I started going through them
and I still vividly remember the
experience of walking down the street
listening to John gottman's book the
seven principles of making a marriage
work on Audible and coming across a part
of the book where he talks about the
fact that in his research
he's found that the people who have the
most satisfaction longterm in their
Partnerships are not the couples who
fight with the best communication skills
or who fight the least they are the
couples who like each other the most
they genuinely and authentically love
the relationship enough that they do not
need it to be
perfect and I still sometimes honestly
look back on that moment in my life and
realize that it was the first time I
think I ever actually understood in my
body what romantic love was that it had
to be this place where there was room
for all of this imperfection and not
like sexy imperfection not the type of
imperfection it feels fun to deal with
the type of imperfection it does not
feel fun to deal with but that you love
someone enough to be willing to deal
with and grow together through anyway
and of course with all of this with work
with relationships with our connections
to ourselves and the bodies that we live
in there are going to be things that are
deal breakers so there are of course
types of conflict that we want to stay
away from there are certain ways of
treating our body that are probably
always going to bring us misery and
there are career paths we could go down
that are probably consistently going to
result in misery for us but the idea is
that in order to figure out which path
feels mostly right and which path feels
most ly wrong we have to be attuned to
reality and to our lives as they
actually are things feeling really wrong
in the present moment is going to alert
us to the fact that maybe we're not
going down the right path and things
feeling really right in the present
moment on the other side of this might
indicate that we have some desires or
some wants in our life that we maybe
haven't been fully conscious of so maybe
we have goals that would be so wildly
fulfilling we couldn't even imagine them
from where we're standing right now
because we haven't been attuned enough
to the present to actually pick up on
what's going to feel fulfilling to us on
Route so again at the end of the day
what we really want to focus in on here
is are my goals and are my ideas of what
I'm heading towards in life enriching my
life in the present moment the moment
that I am currently in or is it taking
away from the present moment and making
me feel deadened inside of my life
because when we have chosen the right
things to strive for in life the things
that are actually going to allow us to
achieve excellence and self-actualize in
very authentic ways even the hard
moments feel meaningful even in the
middle of the worst fights with a
partner who we actually deeply love we
are going to be learning something
important and valuable about ourselves
and our ability to be in relationship
even in the worst days at a job that we
love we are going to be gaining skills
that make us stronger and smarter and
savier people even in the hardest
moments of our lives in whatever
capacity we're showing up to them if we
have chosen meaningful and aligned
Pursuits for ourselves we are going to
be growing inside of those challenges so
we want to be paying deep attention to
whether or not the goals that we have
chosen are enlivening us and growing us
or if they are deadening us and
depleting Us in the present and this is
how we move away from a model of
perfectionism and towards a model of
deep meaning all right this has been a
lot of information and a lot to chew on
so I am going to leave things here for
today as always let me know what you
guys are thinking feeling any questions
you have as you go through this video as
always I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really
[Music]
soon