hey guys Heidi prep here welcome back to
my Channel today I wanted to spend some
time talking about a word that has been
super instrumental to me over the past
six months or so in my attachment
healing work and that term is
self-abandonment so I first heard this
term in some Facebook group that I was a
part of that talked about attachment
work attachment healing and I really
liked it as soon as I heard it like it
resonated somewhere inside of me I
didn't really know what the term meant
but I decided I'm going to take a period
of time and just notice when do I feel
like I am self-abanding when do I start
to notice that I am not particularly
showing up for myself and being on my
own team in life and how can I start to
rearrange my life in such a way that I
am doing that as little as humanly
possible so this video is the result of
about six months of me putting myself
under observation in this way and really
noticing some of what I believe to be
the common experiences in which many of
us automatically self-abandon often
without even realizing it and start
operating from a kind of inauthentic
part of ourselves and we are going to
talk about how to stop doing that so I
Define self-abandonment as any situation
in which we are fragmenting a part of
ourselves and leaving a very important
component of ourselves at the door in
order to usually get validation or
acceptance or approval out of other
people now of course there are
situations in which we all do this a
little bit right so most of us when we
go to work in the morning there is some
part of ourselves that we leave at the
door in order to show up and give back
in a way that puts the focus on the
company or the other people that we're
serving right so that's natural to an
extent when we are parenting when we are
meeting new people when we are in some
sort of social role that requires
certain responsibilities to be met most
of us naturally do a little bit of
leaving ourselves at the door right so
this is is part of just being a human in
society absolutely however
self-abandonment is what I Define as a
prolonged period of fragmenting
ourselves and leaving really important
aspects of ourselves at the door so
those really important really vital
parts of ourselves can be things like
our true thoughts and opinions and
perspectives our true emotions and
vulnerabilities and inner experiences
our true needs and wants and desires
right so often when we are
self-abandoning what starts to happen is
that these fragmented parts of ourselves
that we have left at the door start
showing up as anxiety as depression as
an inability to concentrate or as
self-sabotaging behaviors because I have
the personal belief that there is no
such thing as self-sabotage most of the
time when we think we are
self-sabotaging what's actually happened
is we have abandoned a piece of
ourselves that knows it is important for
our vitality and so that peace is coming
out screaming trying to be heard right
whether that is a need for Comfort
whether that is the need for
authenticity whether that is actually
the need for our physical more adult
survival needs to be met right there are
all of these parts of ourselves that if
we do not pay attention to them and if
we leave them behind for too long they
will start to protest and this video is
going to be all about how to stop doing
that so that as much as humanly possible
we can start bringing our true embodied
authentic selves to every situation we
find ourselves in so no major part of
ourselves has to start kicking up a fuss
begging to be seen and acknowledged so
from the get-go I think a really good
rule of thumb for figuring out whether
we are self-abandoning or whether we are
just doing some kind of natural stepping
into social roles that need to be
temporarily fulfilled is checking in
with our bodies
and going okay if I say yes to this
thing if I allow myself to let's say
leave a part of myself at the door to
either get to know this new person or to
work this job or to do this favor for
someone is there going to be a
significant part of me that feels tense
and resentful right am I going to kind
of hate myself a little bit for saying
yes to this am I going to kind of hate
somebody else for asking me to do this
and me saying yes to it anytime we
experience that strong sense of like
inner resistance and tension it's often
because we are self-abandoning the
opposite of self-abandonment is bringing
our whole integrated selves into every
single situation and often we know we
are doing that when we feel a sense of
ease and relaxation in our bodies
because we're not trying to change our
energy to fit the situation but without
getting further into that let's go into
some of the most common areas I've
noticed over the past six months that
many of us are quick to self-abandon and
then we're going to go into what the
antidotes to those scenarios are so
scenario number one in which I think
many of us are quick to self-abandon is
we put ourselves in situations that we
aren't truly comfortable or aligned with
and then we start seeking out comfort in
unhealthy ways so an example of this
might be taking on a job that you know
you can't really be your true whole self
within but maybe it pays really well
maybe it's prestigious maybe other
people are going to be really impressed
with you taking on this job and so what
you learn to do is go into work in the
morning with that intense inner tension
that comes from resisting the truth and
that comes from compartmentalizing and
ignoring important parts of ourselves
and then you find ways to blow off steam
in massive ways after work on the
weekends on your breaks maybe you are
venting all the time maybe you are going
out and getting drunk every weekend
maybe you are eating unhealthily or
finding ways to seek out the comfort
that you are not getting while you're at
work because again to be comfortable in
the world means to have a relaxed
nervous system to feel like you are not
chronically tensed up because you are
always on alert for someone threatening
your social Mass when we are not wearing
a mask when we are as much as humanly
possible just showing up as who we are
in the world our bodies feel relaxed we
can take deep breaths we can be present
and focused and attentive because we
aren't distracted with thoughts about
trying to push our needs aside in order
to fit the situation right so that sense
of comfort that we get in the world from
being in alignment with ourselves
doesn't leave us with this extreme need
to like binge on Comfort later because
we aren't sucking anything up there is
nothing to kind of let go of in a huge
way afterwards right but this process of
like tension then release then tension
then release that most of us go through
over the course of the average day in
our lives is what ends up causing a lot
of stress a lot of overwhelm and a lot
of compensatory Comfort seeking
behaviors that maybe aren't the
healthiest so I always find that when I
am doing work that I feel truly aligned
with when I'm interacting with people
who I feel truly comfortable in myself
around and when I'm listening
attentively to my own inner needs I have
the easiest time staying healthy getting
good sleeps staying present and focused
on my work because I'm just kind of
being me everywhere I go and it's very
easy on the nervous system and very
relaxing and very non-threatening to be
you everywhere you go situation number
two in which I think most people
frequently and almost compulsively
self-abandon is we decide in our heads
who other people want us to be so who we
think we ought to be in order to be
loved accepted validated whatever it is
and then we shove aside every part of
ourselves that does not fit that mold
and then because it feels so
uncomfortable and so bad inside to do
that we start hating ourselves and we
try to compensate for that self-hatred
by doubling down on this external image
of ourselves and going okay now every
everybody owes me love and appreciation
and validation because I killed off
parts of myself to be accepted by them
so now people need to give me that sense
of love that I cannot give myself and
this is a terrible vicious cycle that
will keep us trapped our entire lives if
we do not become aware of it right when
we are refusing to show up as we
actually are when we are refusing to
share ourselves authentically with other
people when we are refusing to draw
boundaries where we need to draw
boundaries in order to keep ourselves
feeling whole and integrated then we
place this enormous expectation on other
people to give us that love and
validation that we are not giving
ourselves and then we grow to resent
people for not giving us all of that
love and validation when it was never
their jobs to do that in the first place
what happens when we start doing this
and we start Outsourcing our need for
love and worthiness and validation is we
are telling the child that lives inside
of ourselves there are things about you
that are wrong and bad and shameful and
I'm going to hide you away so that other
people will accept me and imagine if you
were telling your four-year-old child
that imagine what that child would grow
up to believe about themselves imagine
the ways they would learn to interact
with other people imagine the ways they
would show up in Intimate Relationships
right it would be a train wreck and it
is a train wreck when we make these
rules for ourselves we shove aside the
parts of our inner children that we
think are embarrassing or are not good
enough or are not in line with this
image of who the adult part of ourselves
wants to see ourselves as we are giving
ourselves the message that there is
something deeply flawed and broken and
wrong with us and the only antidote to
that message is to start believing
something different from the inside no
amount of external praise validation
acceptance approval is ever going to be
enough to fix the wounds that we are
inflicting on our inner child when we
hide them from the world okay this is
important so I'm going to say it again
nothing we can ever get from the
external world will ever ever be enough
to fix the wound we inflict upon
ourselves when we reject our inner
children the only way out is to start
standing up for ourselves and our inner
children allowing ourselves to integrate
every part of ourselves into our lives
as much as possible and to refuse to
give that message to our inner children
that there is something shameful or
wrong or bad about them that they must
hide the less we hide the more we gain
our own self-respect and the more we
gain our own self-respect ironically the
more people are impressed by us and
Drawn to us so if we want to truly fix
this problem From the Inside Out step
number one has to be healing our
relationship with ourselves sitting down
with ourselves and going I do not need
to hide you I do not need to lie about
who I am I'm going to show up in the
world as I actually am and if that
triggers things in other people so long
as I am being respectful of them I'm
going to leave them to deal with that in
the themselves and I am going to
continue standing up for my inner child
and being who I actually am because a
lot of the time the person that we think
other people want us to be is actually
not at all who they want us to be right
think about who you find really cool and
attractive and impressive it's often the
people who have the most self-respect
the people who are the most willing to
stand up for themselves to say what they
need and want and to also treat other
people respectfully those are the kind
of people everybody wants to be around
so if you want to actually win this game
you have to go back to the source take
that agreement you made with yourself
probably when you were a very young
child that you would shut parts of
yourself up in order to get things out
of other people and destroy that
agreement and make a new one which is
what we're going to talk about in the
second part of this video but this
naturally leads us to situation number
three in which a lot of us tend to
self-abandon is we fail to stand up for
ourselves when we are being mistreated
and this can be overt mistreatment so it
can be someone being actively rude to
our faces or it can be covert
mistreatment it can be people pressuring
or coercing us into agreeing to things
that we know we don't want to do but we
fail to see our own needs as important
enough to give voice to right maybe we
shame blame guilt ourselves into saying
yes to things that we really want to say
no to maybe we allow someone to be
unkind or disrespectful towards us
because we really want their approval
and validation and anytime we are
allowing ourselves to be disrespected or
mistreated in the external world again
we are sending a direct message to
ourselves about the kind of treatment
that it's okay for us to tolerate we are
telling our inner children I don't love
you enough to stand up for you when you
are being abused coerced or mistreated
think about that message think about
what it would do to a four-year-old
child to receive that and then notice
how often you are sending that message
to yourself now I want to stop and
acknowledge before we get into part two
of this video which is all about how to
stop doing this that it is really
difficult to stop doing this right it is
kind of like when you are drowning and
you start thrashing harder and harder to
try to keep yourself afloat the natural
instinct when we are self-abandoning and
we start feeling bad about ourselves and
we start needing Comfort is to
self-aband and even harder because if
we've gotten used to kicking ourselves
off our own team we start thinking the
only antidote is to get love acceptance
and validation outside of myself and how
do I get that I will kick myself off my
own team even harder right so there's
this very natural doubling down process
that happens when we don't understand
that we are playing a rigged game and
there is an exit route so if you
recognize that you've been doing this
and you're like oh my God I had no idea
I was doing that to myself and I was
kicking myself off my own team in all
these ways don't judge yourself too
harshly you are thrashing trying to keep
your head above water because you didn't
realize you could reach out your arms
and you could float on water and now we
are going to talk about how to do that
how to stop thrashing trying to get your
needs met and learn to float so to stop
self-abandoning Step One is start trying
to tell the truth as often as humanly
possible to yourself and other people
and the reason I recommend this is
because when we start telling the truth
all of the time we will quickly notice
this goes a lot better in some
situations than other situations there
are some situations in which I truly
just cannot tell the truth and keep my
job tell the truth and hold on to my
relationship tell the truth and respect
myself and if we want to start showing
up for ourselves in a really real way
we're going to have to start noticing
which situations am I chronically
putting myself in where I can't really
bring my whole self to the table and
still get what I need out of the
situation and how do I as much as
humanly possible stop putting myself in
those situations if your partner doesn't
like who you actually are when you start
telling the truth and being authentic is
that the right partner for you if your
work requires you to hold so much
tension in your body because you are
operating from this false self whose
real needs and perspectives and beliefs
are not brought to the table is that
really the right job for you if your
Social Circle is comprised of people who
want you to behave differently in order
for them to feel comfortable around you
is that really the Social Circle you
want to be putting yourself in half of
the Brilliance of committing to telling
the truth is just finally realizing all
of the situations we have elected to put
ourselves in over the course of Our
Lives where lying is the most adaptive
thing and the more we recognize that the
more we're able to make informed choices
how do I want to show up at work what
would be something I could do that would
be more aligned that would allow me to
release the tension from my body and
show up as I actually am more of the
time which traits do I need in friends
or Partners in order to feel like I can
relax and be my full self around them
right telling the truth is not a Magic
Bullet for getting what we want out of
life but it is a Magic Bullet for
realizing where we are out of alignment
with our lives and over a long period of
time this allows us to design our lives
in a much more adaptive way be because
there is no tension between what's going
on on the inside and what's going on in
the outside tip number two for
self-abanding Less is one that I got
from my therapist and I loved this so
much I was essentially in a situation
where I was being offered an opportunity
that I thought would be a really cool
opportunity there were so many logical
reasons to say yes to it there were so
many doors I believed it would open for
me there were so many connections I
hoped I could make out of it but I knew
that there was a very big part of myself
that I would have to self-abandon in
order to say yes to this opportunity I
was already at that time feeling very
non-centered very not in alignment with
myself and I knew that I needed some
time to get back to myself and to get
back in touch with my inner child and I
was kind of proposing this dilemma in
therapy and my therapist said well
sometimes parents have to sacrifice
their needs and their wants for the good
of their children
so what is the youngest part of you
right now what is the most vulnerable
and in need part of you and how can the
inner parent in you tend to that part
and that question absolutely blew my
mind and to this day I still try to get
in touch every time I'm facing a
difficult decision with what does the
most vulnerable part of me need here
because the most vulnerable and in need
parts of ourselves if they get neglected
are at the highest risk for protest
behaviors for kicking up their heels
fragmenting our attention span so that
we can't focus when we're trying to do
what we are trying to force them into
doing for making us feel anxious
depressed lethargic for seeking comfort
in unhealthy ways the most vulnerable
and in need parts of ourselves are
always the parts we need to tend to the
most because they are the most high risk
so in this situation I had to tell
myself as much as the adult in me knows
that this would open a lot of doors and
create a lot of cool opportunities for
me if I cannot walk into those
opportunities with my whole authentic
self-integrated present and online I'm
going to be fragmenting myself in really
terrible ways that down the line are
going to lead to some really intense
challenges and so I had to say no and go
home and take care of myself now of
course there will be times when we are
let's say offered opportunities that we
want to say yes to that require a little
bit of sucking it up and working really
hard for a period of time whatever it is
the problem is when these situations
become chronic when we chronically have
disconnected from a part of ourselves
that needs our care love and attention
when we have told our inner children not
just you need to take a back seat for a
couple of weeks but you need to take a
back seat permanently that's when we
start getting self-sabotage behaviors
our kids start protesting but if we are
always tuning in and asking ourselves
what do the vulnerable parts of me need
and want we learn to integrate and bake
in comfort and self-acceptance and
compassion and for those young
vulnerable parts of ourselves into every
area of our lives and so they stop
protesting they stop fragmenting our
attention they stop bringing our mood
down right a really good sign that we
are living in an integrated way is that
we feel very present most of the time
because our attention is not being
divided between different parts of
ourselves that we have learned to
fragment and leave at the door which
leads me very naturally to step number
three for ceasing to self-abandon is
start to really appreciate what you get
out of not self-abandoning if you have
the true belief that life is better when
you are forgetting about all your own
wants and needs saying yes to what you
think everyone else wants from you and
then living on a diet of external
validation of course it's going to be
hard to say yes to your own needs of
course it's going to be hard to tune in
to yourself and give yourself what you
need because you think that only bad
things will come from that and I think
that this is a natural tendency that a
lot of us have internalized because
that's the game we've been taught to
play most of our our lives right we have
been taught the kick yourself off your
own team game and do what other people
want you to do it's what is drilled into
us from the time we are children the
more we start to actually set boundaries
say yes only when we want to say yes and
say no when we need to say no the more
we learn to tune into our bodies notice
when we feel the most internal tension
and put ourselves in more and more
situations where that tension is
released the more we realize that there
is another way to live that feels way
better and the more we start to notice
this the easier it gets to continue to
say yes to ourselves right if I set a
boundary and I notice that it
disappoints someone in the moment but
then later when I'm spending time with
that person I can actually bring my
entire embodied sense of self to the
interaction because I don't feel any
secret resentment towards them or myself
that is going to be an overall much
better and healthier relationship than
if I am always saying yes to please this
person but then go into the situations
feeling resentment angry fragmented cut
off distracted right that's how we build
unhealthy resent Laden connections as
opposed to deep authentic connections if
I am chronically dissociating from my
own needs for comfort and care and
support and relaxation I'm going to
start having parts of my inner child
coming up screaming and protesting and
I'm going to suddenly have a really hard
time paying attention at work I'm going
to burn out and stop feeling creative
and stop feeling inspired and start
feeling depressed anxious fragmented and
not know why because these parts of
myself that I've been abandoning are the
parts of myself that bring that Vitality
creativity excitement and presence to my
work and the more I'm able to realize
that it is setting boundaries staying
true to myself standing up for myself
that lead me to these places the more
I'm going to realize oh my God this is
so worth doing it is so worth the
initial discomfort of setting these
boundaries series to get the end result
of living a life that I'm actually
showing up to and being present within
as much as humanly possible and I am
sending such a wonderful loving message
to my inner child which allows me to
show up in the world in a completely
different way I had a situation in the
past where there's someone who I really
valued and wanted to be a part of my
life but they were chronically kind of
speaking to me in a bit of a
disrespectful Manner and I ended up
finally having to draw really explicit
boundaries and going you know what if we
can't work this through if you can't
speak to me respectfully I'm going to
have to not have you in my life anymore
and it was a very painful and difficult
boundary to set that I really didn't
want to set but the next week debriefing
in therapy my therapist asked me a
question that really got me thinking
which was you were 10 years old and
someone came to you and started speaking
to you the way that person spoke to you
and your parent walked in and told that
person you cannot speak to my child that
way they deserve respect and if you
cannot respect them you need to get out
of their lives how much would you love
that parent
how valued would you feel what would you
internalize about yourself through that
interaction and for whatever reason that
question blew me away thinking of the
child in me as someone who I am
responsible for protecting and for
teaching their Worth to completely
changed the game for me and this is what
we're doing when we set boundaries for
ourselves we are teaching the child
within us this is what I as your parent
will tolerate and not tolerate when it
comes to how other people treat you
because I believe you are worthy of
being treated well and when we
internalize that message when the child
within us learns their inner worth and
value oh my god do they ever grow up to
be a cool ass adult they grow into this
confident embodied version of themselves
who loves themselves enough to extend
that same warmth and non-judgmental
attitude towards other people and that
is the person who makes everybody feel
good to be around right so ironically
the more we refuse to self-abandon in
order to to get the approval or
validation of other people the more we
actually grow ourselves into a person
who other people super want to be around
because we are able to exude the same
warmth and love and self-acceptance that
we give ourselves I'm okay you're okay
the secure world view you're no longer
playing that I'll be good enough one
game right you're playing the game of I
know how to set my boundaries to keep
myself feeling present vital alive
connected and lacking resentment towards
myself and others and I can teach other
people to do the same thing by example
all right I could talk about this
forever like I could really keep going
with this because it is such an
important topic and I think it is such a
vital component to attachment healing
work but I've already been talking for a
while so I'm going to leave it here for
today let me know in the comments
section where you guys are at in this
process which situations do you notice
yourself self-abanding in and is there a
way you are now planning to start
showing up for yourself differently I'm
always curious to hear your perspectives
thoughts experiences so please drop them
in the comments as always I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves your inner children and each
other and I will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]