hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today we are talking
about a term that I call self-
neutrality so I want to be clear from
the get-go if you Google the word self-
neutrality I think you get about 25
different definitions of it and in this
video I will be referencing absolutely
no external definitions of this term in
this video I will just be using it to
describe a particular frame of reference
that I like to turn to when I'm
struggling with the concept of self-love
so if you are on any type of Journey
when it comes to your self-identity your
self-concept your attachment style
whatever it is something most of us hear
very frequently is that we need to love
ourselves and while that is a wonderful
sentiment and I truly believe it is a
very achievable end goal for almost
anyone there are a lot of steps in
between where most of us are starting
and selflove I remember years ago when I
started doing this work I would hear
that all the time like love yourself
accept yourself and I would just go okay
but how like what does that mean and so
at the time I developed what was a
middle ground for myself that I think
could be helpful for a lot of people
which is the concept of self- neutrality
now in order to understand what self-
neutrality is I'm first going to explain
what it is not those of us who grew up
with either fairly significant insecure
attachment patterning so that means
patterns of thought and behavior that
rest on the assumption that some part of
One's Own authentic experience of the
self is shameful wrong or bad and needs
to be hidden distorted or done away with
in order to stay in relationship with
others or anyone who for whatever reason
developed a shame bound identity so last
week I put out a video called toxic
shame what it is and how to heal from it
which I will link in the description of
this video and to have a shame bound
Identity or to be insecurely attached in
my opinion are kind of two different
terms for the same thing but in any case
what I'm getting at here is that if for
whatever reason you developed the belief
about yourself that there is something
wrong with you that you are flawed or
broken or not like other people at your
core you are likely struggling with what
someone like John Bradshaw who is a
brilliant shame researcher would call a
shame bound identity so the belief that
something about the real you has
something deeply wrong with it now the
problem is if you develop a shame bound
identity that belief that something is
intrinsically wrong with you it becomes
very difficult to function in the world
we need a sense of self-esteem and a
sense of self-worth even if it is
contrived and inauthentic in order to
keep our El psychologically well enough
to remain alive so to balance out that
sense of extreme shame we have to
develop compensatory mechanisms for
making ourselves feel okay those might
look like developing an ego cell so
thinking of ourselves as particularly
cool interesting better than other
people more intellectual more
intelligent whatever it is that allows
us to distance ourselves from that
feeling of shame that we have at our
core or it can mean developing an ego
around how pure and innocent and good
you are and how you have never done
anything to hurt anybody else and if
something goes wrong in your
relationships it must be the other
person because you have perfectly pure
intentions or it could look like leaning
into what you believe is your inner
Badness and developing a Persona about
how rebellious and different you are
whatever it is there needs to be
something that is equally inauthentic to
your core self that you use to balance
out those feelings of shame it is a
natural survival response and for some
of us it can even just be sitting in
that kind of shameful view of ourselves
but constantly dissociating into
fantasies of a future where we are
better than we are now where we are
richer or better looking or more
charismatic or more interesting or we've
achieved more and everybody loves us and
we can spend our entire lives caught up
in those fantasies of a magical future
where things are different and for some
of us personal development and trying to
get ourselves closer and closer to that
future ideal can become somewhat of an
addiction in and of itself the problem
is that we aren't ever really getting
closer to solving the problem the more
we build up our ego so the more we think
of ourselves as better than everybody
else and actually the reason why other
people didn't understand us when we were
young or we weren't accepted When We
Were Young is just because all of these
characteristics we have whether it's us
being the coolest most intellectual
person in the world or or the kindest
most pure empathic person in the world
or the world's biggest Underdog whatever
it is the more we convince ourselves
that those things are our true identity
the more we actually get away from what
we need to do in order to properly heal
in order to properly heal we need to
feel and learn to integrate that shame
that is at our core it will not go away
if we just try to run from it we cannot
personal develop our way out of it we
cannot date our way out of it we cannot
succeed our way out of it we have to
find a way to eventually grapple with
the shame that we feel at our core and
work through it until we realize it is
not the truth about who we are and only
then are we going to be able to get back
in touch with our authentic selves and
start living in a more aligned authentic
and relaxed way where we are no longer
running
from that shame that governs everything
we do and for myself I found embracing
the principle of self- neutrality to be
a wonderful middle step between that
toxic shame that I was constantly in my
early life trying to offset through
personal development and the idea of
complete and total self-love and
acceptance which when I was starting
this journey felt completely and totally
Out Of Reach so what I call self-
neutrality in a nutshell is simply
allowing oneself to entertain the idea
that you are exactly like everybody else
at your core you are neither exceptional
nor inherently shameful relative to
other people in fact you are just like
everybody else and the ways in which you
differ from other people are a product
of your
experiences not a product of you just
having magically received a bad broken
Soul so personally it blew my mind when
I finally realized that healing myself
esteem was not going to be a matter of
finally finding a way to be more
successful attractive competent
independent interesting than everybody
else for those who lean more anxious it
might blow your mind to realize that
your self-esteem is not ever going to
heal through having the perfect
relationship with somebody else our
self-esteem heals when we finally accept
that everything we are feeling is a
normal thing to feel if we are having
extreme emotional reactions it is
because our early experiences shaped our
patterns of thinking feeling and
behaving in a specific way that
necessitated that later response and
anybody born in our exact shoes going
through our exact experiences in life in
the bodies that we were born in would
have developed the exact same responses
so if we have this massive Chasm between
toxic shame and idealistic ego beliefs
about the self in the middle we have the
ground of self- neutrality where we can
entertain the idea that we are not in
fact inherently worse or inherently
better than anybody else we are
perfectly ordinary this doesn't mean
we're not interesting it doesn't mean
there's not lots about us that other
people might be thrilled to get to know
about one day but what it means is that
the substance of our souls is not
different than anybody else's the ways
in which we're different from other
people can all be explained through past
experiences and the ways in which we
have developed around those experiences
and the more you can hold yourself in
this space in the healing process the
more clearly you're going to be able to
see your own life the more clearly
you're able to see your own life the
more you're able able to have compassion
for yourself and empathy in the healing
process and that becomes a massive
precursor to developing
self-love so for the rest of this video
we are going to talk about how to
practice self- neutrality and eventually
start planting the seeds for True
embodied love of the self to grow in its
place there's a quote that I love so
much that I canot remember the
attribution for or seem to find on
Google but it goes love is at the root
of understanding understanding is at the
root of love and what that quote means
to me is that if we really stay with
anything if we really stay present with
another person with ourselves with a
particular line of reasoning we will
eventually understand it enough that we
find it impossible to not align
ourselves with it we eventually
understand that a certain person could
not be any way other than the way that
they are based on what they've been
through or we understand that a sequence
of events could not possibly have turned
out differently than it did based on
everything that happened leading up to
it and when we arrive at that place we
are aligning ourselves with reality and
when we are aligned with reality it is
almost impossible not to feel empathetic
about everything that is happening
because we have arrived at a place of
true deep understanding understanding is
at the root of love love is at the root
of understanding when we are able to
understand understand ourselves that
deeply empathy for ourselves and love
for ourselves naturally begins to flow
out of that so the first step in this
process of practicing self- neutrality
is to become curious about our own
emotional responses so instead of
shaming ourselves for the things that we
don't want to feel and for everyone
that's going to be something different
we can get really curious with ourselves
about why a person whether it's us or
some some else would possibly be feeling
that thing why would a person whether
it's ourselves or someone else behave in
the ways that we have behaved over the
course of Our Lives that maybe we don't
like or aren't proud of so whenever I'm
struggling to understand a particular
piece of my own psychology or a pattern
of behavior that I'm frustrated with I
try to take a step back and go if
someone were born as a completely blank
slate they had no thoughts feelings
opinions they had no particular
inclinations of any sort what would
happen to them in life that would lead
them to a place where they were behaving
in this way that I am behaving what
might happen to a person that would
cause that and at this point you might
need to do some self-educating so there
was about a year and a half where all I
did was read psychology books and try to
figure out which types of things
influence which types of behavior
patterns thought patterns emotional
patterns happening I didn't an entire
degree in attachment Theory trying
trying to figure this out and while that
is obviously a little bit excessive for
most people it's extraordinarily helpful
to start developing an understanding of
what causes people to behave in the ways
in which they behave from a detached
non-judgmental mindset the more you can
look at your own behavior through such a
lens with non-judgmental curiosity the
more you're going to start to understand
why you're doing what you're doing
including why you're doing things you're
doing that you wish you would stop doing
but maybe can't seem to find a way to
stop the goal here is not to change any
of your behavior it's simply to change
your mindset from one of judgment to one
of curiosity and openness to
understanding so at this point you're
thinking of yourself less as a person
and more of a science experiment and
that is totally okay it takes the
pressure off it allows you to just be
curious and observant of your own
patterns of behavior and thinking and
feeling and develop some sort of
language for why you are thinking
feeling and behaving the way that you
are because if you do not in fact have a
broken soul and if you are not in fact
inherently flawed broken and bad there
must be an explanation for whatever has
been going on for you step two and for
some people this is going to be much
easier than step one for some people it
is going to be infinitely harder is
start applying the same type of
reasoning to everybody else now I do not
suggest being open Curious and
non-judgmental of others because I think
it is the moral thing to do I do think
it's the moral thing to do but I also
don't really care about that I suggest
being curious open and nonjudgmental of
others because it is the effective thing
to do when it comes to developing a
healthier relationship with yourself now
why would applying this open non
judgmental reasoning towards other
people including people who have treated
you terribly be good for your own sense
of
self-esteem when we are in meshed with
other people when we do not know where
we end and someone else begins it
becomes very easy to take things
extremely personally all the time if I
believe that in every interaction where
one person is getting treated badly
there must be a good person and a bad
person I will spend much of my life
preoccupied with trying to figure out
who's good and who's bad and that
preoccupation will rob me of much of the
good that life has to offer the way out
of this game is to decide that nobody is
inherently bad now does that mean that
there are no people who are behaving
harmfully absolutely not does that mean
that everybody is trustworthy absolutely
not does that mean we should never
protect ourselves absolutely not you're
getting the picture here what it means
is that you do not get to selectively
play this game either there are no
inherently bad people or there are if
you are living with a worldview that
there are people who are just inherently
bad broken flawed in their souls you are
going to find a way on one of your bad
days to convince yourself that you are
one of those people the only way out of
this game is to decide that there are no
such people in order to decide that it
means you have to give up your villain
stories about other people this does not
mean you have to like respect or put up
with bad treatment from other people all
it means is you have to be willing to
consider the possibility that when
someone else is treating you badly it
does not have all that much to do with
you and they are treating you that way
because they too are a product of their
experiences just like you are a product
of yours understanding that under the
right circumstances and by the right
circumstances I mean the most Dreadful
possible circumstance is imaginable
everybody exhibits trauma responses and
some of those trauma responses lead to
very bad behavior that harms other
people allows us to understand that we
too are not immune to that and it also
kind of frees us from taking things
personally when we understand that other
people who behave badly towards us are
offloading their own shame instead of
integrating it internally that feels a
lot better than believing that they're
treating us that way because we are
wretched terrible shameful people who
deserve bad treatment right so we
definitely need to have and maintain
boundaries around those who behave
unkindly or disrespectfully towards us
but we can do that well accepting that
they just like us are a product of their
experiences and the only person we can
really control is ourselves and so
that's who we're going to focus our
energy on so step three when it comes to
developing a thought pattern that is
based around self- neutrality I'm going
to recommend if you really struggle with
the concept that there is not something
wrong with you picture yourself walking
past a playground that has very young
children in it children who are 2 or 3
years old and ask yourself which one of
these kids do not deserve care and
protection and guidance as they go
through life almost all adults are going
to instinctually answer all of these
children deserve that thing the odd
adult is not going to answer that and
that adult is almost always going to be
the one who blames themselves for their
own early abuse neglect rejection
whatever it was but I guarantee you if
you are watching this and you believe
that every child out there deserves care
protection respect and guidance from
loving adults but you did not you were
the exception you were just the kid that
was so bad and so flawed that you
deserve everything that happened to you
I am going to tell you right now you are
not the exception to this rule how do I
know that I know that because there is
not an exception to this rule you are
not special enough to be the only
exception to it what you are doing when
you are telling yourself you're the
exception to this rule is you are
projecting your adult reasoning
abilities onto your younger self when
you were that age you did not know what
you know now you did not have the
emotional regulation skills that you
have now you did not have the logical
reasoning skills that you have now you
did not have the capacity to understand
what you would have needed to understand
in order to develop differently how do
you know that's true because it's true
of everybody children do not have the
skills adults have to reason the way
adults reason however from a very young
age some children experience what the
psychologist John Bradshaw calls a
broken will your will as defined by
Bradshaw is the part of yourself that
believes consciously that you are
inherently worthy of care and respect
children's Wills often get broken when
they have shame offloaded onto them by
adults who need the children to behave
in a certain way in order for them the
adults to stay regulated this does not
mean the adult is an inherently evil
corrupt person in large part these are
just adults who are behaving
unconsciously and not aware of how their
own patterning is affecting others but
when children become responsible for the
emotional well-being of their caregivers
overtly or covertly the part of their
minds that inherently knows that they
are worthy of of care respect guidance
exactly as they are gets broken and when
our will gets broken like that we stop
believing that we deserve those things
we stop believing that there is any
goodness in us to access but we are
always wrong if that is what we believe
no child comes into this world
inherently broken no child is the
exception airgo you are not the
exception now the next thing I'm going
to recommend in rejigging your worldview
a little bit to move away from that
toxic shame idealized self ricocheting
and land in the middle in self-
neutrality is refuse to engage in
magical thinking and this is not an easy
suggestion when we live in a state of
toxic shame fantasies whether those are
romantic fantasies fantasies about
breaking generational cycles and healing
the entire world fantasies about the
kind of person we want to become and all
the impressive things we want to do in
the world these can become very powerful
addictions because we can use them to
self-regulate and keep ourselves
emotionally balanced so it is not easy
to wake up one morning and stop
fantasizing about a magical future where
everything is different and we never
feel shame again however the more we can
limit ourselves for reaching for these
fantasies in the moments that we access
our shame the more we can learn to be
present with that shame and start to
make friends with it a different relief
from the suffering that is inherent to
accessing a sense of toxic shame is
stepping into Observer mode going I'm
going to approach this from a self-
neutral place and just ask myself
questions be curious with myself about
why it is that I'm feeling what I'm
feeling right now and the more we can
begin to step into that Observer mode
and start to coach ourselves through
these moments where we feel that shame
the better a relationship we develop
with what's underneath that shame which
is our authentic selves and our actual
wants beliefs Curiosities about the
world that we have shoved down for most
of our lives but in order to get there
we have to detach from these fantasy
versions of ourselves and make the
commitment to ourselves to stay present
and to work with our actual entire
selves as we exist in the present moment
and the more we're able to do this from
a self- neutral place the more we're
going to find that there are a lot of
things we actually kind of like about
ourselves and that it kind of sucks that
we spent our lives denying because we
have some really cool traits but to get
in touch with those traits we have to
stop dissociating into a fantasy where
we are a completely different person
than the one we are now so in the next
point I'm going to reiterate we need to
find a way to consistently observe our
emotional experiences without shaming
ourselves for them because for self-love
and self-esteem to develop it takes a
couple of things an acceptance that you
are normal is the first and foremost
thing so you are no less human than
anybody else you do not need to be
ashamed of the quality of your soul but
you also need to accept that you are not
made of exceptional human qualities
despite the fact that you might have
many good and interesting qualities that
you have spent a lot of your life
intentionally nurturing but when it
comes to who you are you are just like
everybody else as the saying goes at the
end of the game the king and the pawn go
back into the same box and the reason
they go back into the same box is
because because they are made of the
same material but the more that you can
truly grasp and absorb that concept the
more you can begin to understand the
utility of all of your emotions instead
of constantly trying to manipulate your
own emotions because you feel shame
around them every feeling we have is
important and it is telling us something
about the nature of reality and our
lives and the more we can listen to
those emotions the more we get in touch
with the world as it actually exists
the more we stay in touch with reality
as it actually exists the less moments
of disconnection we experience and the
less moments of disconnection we
experience the less shame we feel so
this is an upward spiral because the
better we are able to assess ourselves
and other people accurately the more
connection that is authentic we are able
to have and the more authentic
connection we have the less shame we
feel about ourselves and the more we
take on this process the more feedback
we get from ourselves and other people
about the normaly of our emotions
everybody feels angry sometimes
everybody feels sexual attraction
sometimes everybody feels embarrassed
nervous stupid disregulated sometimes
and actually the fact that we feel all
that stuff is what connects us to other
people not the other way around and once
you can accept the normaly of the entire
range of your emotions you start to lift
yourself slowly out of that sense of
toxic shame that you've been cloaked in
your entire life but we have to master
this idea of self- neutrality before we
can move into self- Lov because self-
neutrality gives us a sense of humility
and in order to have true self-esteem we
need to be humble enough to understand
that we are not inherently different
than anybody else everything about us is
normal airgo the traits that we want to
develop and work on inside of ourselves
when we get there will be the product of
having put in really hard work and then
we can be truly proud of ourselves
because we aren't just running away from
this bad feeling we are starting from a
place of neutrality and building upon it
in a positive way and most importantly
we are observing ourselves accurately
when we are observing ourselves
accurately we are in the I'm okay you're
okay worldview that is inherent to those
who have secure attachment Styles so if
someone is rude to us if someone behaves
poorly towards us it doesn't impact the
way we think about ourselves though it
may impact the way that we interact with
that person going forward if we make a
mistake we don't have to think I am a
mistake and there is something
inherently flawed about me we go I made
a mistake because I was necessarily
missing information how do I go find the
information I need to correct the
mistake and proceed different going
forward which again is what it feels
like to be centered in that I'm okay
you're okay worldview it doesn't mean
I'm exceptional and perfect and do
everything right it means I am just like
everybody else which means when I mess
up there is a way to fix it and anyone
in my exact shoes would have messed up
in the exact same ways it's not ever
that personal to me the more we Embrace
self- neutrality the more we feel
comfortable reaching out for help asking
ask questions when we don't understand
something holding space for other people
to make mistakes without making it about
us and the more we can do all of this
the more we slowly transform ourselves
into someone that we deeply respect and
self-respect is the absolute seed of
self-love and everything that we grow to
love about ourselves is going to Blossom
out of developing That Base sense of
self-respect all right that's all I have
to say for today on the concept of self-
neutrality as always let me know your
thoughts opinions questions in the
comment section I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]