hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we are
talking about self-esteem and today in
particular I want to talk about the role
that structure and discipline plays when
it comes to inner child or reparenting
work now if you don't know what the term
inner child means I do have a video
Linked In the description of this one
that goes over what that term means but
essentially I'm going to encourage us to
just think of our inner children as the
part of ourselves that exists beneath
all the layers of social conditioning
that just reacts in a very pure instant
and emotional way to everything that is
happening inside of our lives and
essentially the idea is that the more
layers of attachment wounding or trauma
or whatever it is we have on top of
those basic authentic emotional
reactions the less in touch with our
inner children were going to be now when
I see people approaching inner child
work whether this is workshops to talk
about reparenting or blogs whatever the
resource is what I see getting really
heavily focused on is the role of
getting in touch with joy spontaneity
and playfulness and while all of those
qualities are absolutely wonderful
qualities to access inside of ourselves
I think that we aren't always going
about it in the most direct way when you
look at children and when you look at
which children are the happiest and the
least distressed it's often the the
children whose parents are holding a
healthy amount of structure for them so
parents who know their child well enough
to understand what kind of structure and
discipline that child needs in order to
feel as though they can kind of let go a
little bit and just enjoy their lives
and be creative and grow and learn
things and the children who you see
struggling the most are often children
whose needs are being the most neglected
so children whose needs for safety
security and structure are not being met
in their home environment or children
whose needs for structure and security
are being met in a way that does not
take into account what their actual
needs are so this might be the case when
children come from a more authoritarian
household where the rules of the house
are not actually structured around the
child's flourishing they're structured
around the parents feelings which might
be very stifling for the child's
emotional expression so children who
come from more authoritarian households
tend to grow into adults that look at
structure as a dirty word because
because the structure that was imposed
upon them when they were children may
have felt meaningless like it did not
actually help them to relax and enjoy
their lives and Learn and Grow which is
what it's a child's job to do it
actually kept them very oppressed and it
made them have to chronically monitor
their behavior to make sure they weren't
making a mistake so in this sense
children from homes like that were not
actually given adquate structure because
they were not given the structure that
was needed for their own growth and
development and that's what we're going
to talk about today children including
the inner children that live inside of
all of us need meaningful discipline and
structure in order to let go and relax
into their lives and be creative and so
if we want to allow our inner children
to access that energy consistently we
have to get to know those kids figure
out what their needs are and then start
showing up for ourselves in a way that
provides containment for those children
and they will naturally come out and do
the rest of the work so the way I look
at reparenting is not through the lens
of how do I very consciously and
deliberately engage in more Play It's
how do I create the conditions for
myself where I feel naturally safe to be
playful and creative in my everyday life
how do I make sure that I am meeting
enough of my own needs and that I trust
myself enough to continue Meeting those
needs to allow s to relax into the
experience of living and take the highs
and lows of life as they naturally come
so we're going to go over a list of
questions you can ask yourself to start
getting an idea of where you may or may
not be giving your own inner child the
structure that they need to thrive and I
just want to reiterate one more time all
children naturally rebel against
structure that they find to be
meaningless whether that Rebellion means
acting out or shutting down internally
but when children understand in their
bodies when they have a felt sense that
the limits being placed on me are
keeping me safe they flourish they might
throw temper tantrums along the way but
ultimately they experience a deep sense
of safety that allows them to take many
more risks in the world so what we're
going to talk about as this video goes
on is how to cultivate that sense of
safety for your inner child as an adult
so that you can get more comfortable
feeling secure enough to take more risks
in your life so here are five questions
you can ask yourself to figure out where
your relationship with your inner child
is currently at question one on a daily
basis how anxious and overwhelmed do you
feel versus how energized and creative
do you feel when we are not tending to
our own practical and emotional needs in
a consistent way our inner children
become overwhelmed with anxi iety
because they know I don't have a parent
looking out for me so if we are
neglecting any major area of what keeps
us safe and healthy in the world our
inner children are going to become
overwhelmed with anxiety versus if they
know that we are able to take care of
ourselves and that we are going to do so
even when it's not particularly fun our
inner children can relax and the mental
real estate that normally gets dedicated
to them panicking and ruminating
over how they're going to get their
needs met can get spent on creative
thinking think about a 4-year-old or a
7-year-old trying to figure out how
they're going to pay rent stay healthy
get a job these are not the jobs that
should be going to our inner children
but when we neglect the adult part of
ourselves the part of our mind that
knows how to take care of us we start
trying to solve those problems from an
emotional place and from an emotional
Place those problems feel like anxiety
and distress so what we want to do here
and we're going to talk more about this
after we go through the rest of the
questions is figure out how we can keep
certain systems running in the
background of Our Lives that are getting
our needs met and get clear with
ourselves on how much time and energy am
I going to devote to those systems every
single day in order to free up my mind
for the rest of the time that I'm awake
to think about other things that are not
stress inducing so there's this quote
about doing Hard Exercise that I cannot
find the contribution for right now but
I remember going something along the
lines of I can have one hard hour a day
and 23 Easy hours or I can have 24 hard
hours and the idea here is that getting
the hard things done in life and
attending to our practical needs doesn't
always feel great while we're doing it
but it allows us the mental ease to
enjoy the rest of our lives without
having to fixate and ruminate on how
we're going to get our needs met second
question to ask yourself to start
examining your relationship with your
inner child how grounded do I feel when
making decisions so when we know our
inner Children Well when we've actually
taken the time to get to know who we
authentically are under those layers of
conditioning and what is really
important to us in life a natural set of
priorities comes to the surface of our
awareness and having a natural set of
priorities that are authentic to us
allows making decisions to come fairly
easily it doesn't mean we're going to
love every decision it doesn't mean
we're always going to choose perfectly
or that every decision is going to feel
effortless but when we are not in touch
with our inner children when we are
basing most of our decisions around how
we want to be perceived by other people
or around what we think we should do
with our lives often what happens is we
feel really stressed anytime we have to
make a decision large or small because
in some way we are at war with ourselves
and the way to end that at war with the
self is to spend a lot of time actually
getting to know your inner child so that
they trust you to make wise decisions
remember this is the difference between
the child who is thriving because their
parents are able to set rules and
limitations that allow them to feel safe
versus the children who are crippled
under the pressure of adhering to rules
that don't make any sense for them and
that are actually there to serve their
parent when we make decisions based on
what we think the rest of the world
wants from us or based on how we want to
be perceived we are being abusive
authoritarian parents to our own inner
children and when we make decisions
based on what our inner child wants in a
given moment and nothing else we are
being neglectful parents who are not
giving our children an adequate amount
of structure and discipline to be a
healthy and secure parent means to
deeply understand both the wants and the
needs of our children and create enough
structure through the decisions that we
make on a daily basis for ourselves to
allow our inner children to thrive and
get some of what they want but most of
what they need so if decisions are
something you really struggle with ask
yourself am I more of an authoritarian
parent or a neglectful one or do I
flip-flop between the two do I go
authoritarian and try to adhere to all
of these rules and things I think I
should do and then ricochet back over to
the other side and for a while give
myself everything I want as soon as I
want it and in both cases what's often
being missed out on is who you
authentically are what your actual needs
are in life and your actual desires and
you can start building a life around
those things instead of ricocheting back
and forth between those two extremes but
we're going to talk about that a little
bit more after the next questions third
question you might want to ask yourself
to start getting an idea of how that
relationship with your inner child is
going on average how much resentment do
you feel towards the other people in
your life versus how much do you feel as
though you are present and accepting of
the people in your life when we are not
showing up as responsible parents for
our inner children what our inner
children start naturally doing is
looking around to see hey who in my life
looks like a responsible adult who might
be able to meet my needs and then we
start getting attached to other people
expecting them to do the parenting of
our inner children for us the problem is
that this is nobody else's job so by and
large people are not going to be willing
to take on that job for us and we're
going to start resenting them for not
providing us with the structure and
discipline we're craving the reason
we're going to go to resentment rather
than anger is because anger is an
emotion that leads to setting boundaries
and if we set boundaries now we've just
put up a fence between ourselves and the
other person and how are they going to
meet our needs from the other side of
that fence so we keep them close but we
experience chronic resentment towards
them resentment is usually a sign of
enmeshment we feel like we can't say
what we want to say or we can't ask for
what we want to ask for either because
we're terrified of boundaries or because
we are dependent upon them for meeting
our needs usually it's some degree of
both and often the problem here is that
the need needs we are looking to other
people to fulfill are actually needs we
need to be meeting for our inner
children and so experiencing chronic
resentment might be a sign that we
aren't fully showing up for ourselves
and then we're projecting the need to be
taken care of onto other people and
expecting them to do it for us fourth
question you might want to ask yourself
to figure out where your relationship
with your inner child is at is how
patient versus how panicked am I about
getting my needs met so something I see
quite a bit on the internet when I go
perusing through different forums and
Facebook groups that talk about
attachment healing in particular is this
kind of gutteral panic around having
unmet needs and I think that once again
when our inner children are running the
show and they know that they have
neglectful parents anytime a need comes
up they're going to panic versus if you
have a child with healthy and secure
parents they can have the odd need come
up and they understand that for most
people life is kind of a constant
fluctuation of meeting different needs
at different times so maybe for a while
you really need to focus on your career
at the expense of your Social well-being
but if you have a healthy inner parent
who you know sees you and understands
you and knows what your overall needs
are it feels a lot more comfortable to
put certain needs on the back burner for
a period of time in order to meet more
pressing ones because you know that your
Healthy parent is keeping track of which
needs are going under met and that
they're going to make sure those things
get taken care of in the future so when
we trust ourselves to both understand
our own needs as well as find roots for
getting them met it's not a
panic-inducing sensation to for a period
of time have a need go unmet but again
if our inner children are running the
show and they don't trust our inner
parent to meet their needs they're going
to start desperately grasping at
whatever they can find to get their
needs or wants which they often can't
distinguish be between satisfied so
again we're going to talk more about the
antidote to this but we just want to get
an awareness to start of which of these
things we might be struggling more or
less with and the fifth and last
question I recommend asking yourself is
the question how much does shame and
embarrassment hold me back from pursuing
the things that I want out of my life
and this is a really subtle but
important question to ask yourself
because what it gets at is where does
your or child have genuine skill
deficits that they need your help
developing around often when our
children feel a lot of shame or
embarrassment so they're having thoughts
like oh I really want to start dating
but I don't really know how to relate to
other people in a way that feels natural
to me I only really know how to date
from a social mass or maybe your inner
child really wants to do more body based
stuff more movement more sport more
activity but they feel really awkward
and uncomfortable in their body or maybe
in general you just want to feel more
competent and capable of going after
what you want in life but your inner
child has this fear that you're not
smart enough to figure any of that out
on your own and these are areas where if
we just tell our children you're fine
you're totally skilled in those areas
just go for it we're actually just kind
of gaslighting ourselves because we
often do have very real skill deficits
that what we actually need to do in
order to feel confident is to take the
time to patiently and compassionately
develop Grace in the areas where we
currently feel awkward sometimes it
works to fake it till you make it but
other times it really doesn't other
times we really do have to sit down with
ourselves and figure out in a stepbystep
way how am I going to develop this skill
that I currently don't have but that
feels important to me just sending our
inner child out into the world to
blindly fail at things without any sense
of structure is it's not very good
parenting If the child inside of us
really feels awkward around other people
maybe it's worth investing some time and
resource into slowly learning social
skills maybe if our inner child feels
really embarrassed about their
appearance it's worth looking at am I
actually taking care of my hygiene needs
my health needs do I know what clothes
look good on me and what I feel really
confident wearing this is the process of
respecting the Dignity of our inner
children AO the Dignity of ourselves
getting angry at ourselves for lacking
skills that we were never adequately
taught or that at the time we were
taught them we were too traumatized or
too dissociated to really take them on
does not get us anywhere healthy
reparenting work means being willing to
go back over some of the lessons that we
kind of missed the first time around and
figuring out how we can cater those
lessons to the people we now know
ourselves to be and to the more
vulnerable and CAU ious parts of
ourselves that might need a little bit
of extra structure around those areas
maybe my inner child has this desire to
go out dancing but they feel really
awkward in their body so they only want
to go out dancing when they're really
drunk and maybe a loving thing for my
inner parent to do is rather than force
that child to put down the alcohol if
that's starting to feel like a problem
and just go do the thing that feels
super uncomfortable maybe it's about
investing in a program or an instructor
who can actually teach my inner child to
feel comfortable and attuned to the
music so that eventually through
practice and skill building they can do
this thing that they want to do without
feeling embarrassed or needing to
dissociate while doing it so this is
embodiment work that happens from the
ground up and what I want to go over now
really quickly is just some of the
antidotes or ways you might want to
start working on any of the things we
just talked about if your answer to any
of those five questions was was not the
answer that you would have hoped so if
you find that your inner child is
chronically anxious and they don't have
a lot of mental space to relax and be
playful creative and spontaneous in your
life what you're going to want to do is
make sure that you're spending some time
figuring out what are your inner child's
biggest stressors which areas of your
life on a practical level are you
consistently not attending to in a way
that your inner child is taking the
stress and anxiety on about so are you
taking care of your own security needs
your own health needs your own hygiene
needs your own mental health needs and
which things can you start putting into
your life that you trust yourself to be
consistent enough with in order for your
inner child to relax a bit so often what
this looks like is taking a step back
from both that authoritarian inner
parent and that neglectful inner parent
and finding the realistic compromise
so instead of going I need to Triple my
income this year and then getting really
stressed out and falling back and
burning out for 6 months and then
starting to feel stress over your
security needs can you figure out a bare
minimum amount of work that you need to
do every month or a bare minimum budget
you need to stick to to give yourself
just enough freedom to not panic all of
the time so this is about dropping the
idealism and telling yourself I have to
make sure that no matter what even on
the worst months when I'm feeling the
most burnt out and unmotivated here is
the bare minimum I will commit to doing
and it has to be something you actually
trust yourself to do here is the bare
minimum of how I will care for my health
even when I'm feeling exhausted here is
the bare minimum amount of socializing I
will do to make sure that I don't become
completely isolated and withdrawn here
is the bare minimum amount of work I
will do in order to make sure that I can
keep paying my bills without extreme
overwhelm
setting out these bare minimum rules for
yourself that you and your inner child
agree upon allows your inner child to
relax especially after they have seen
you employ these bare minimum rules
during periods where otherwise you may
have let responsibility slide this can
help you build back a sense of trust
with your inner child because they're
going to start to see you behave in a
practical and realistic way but also in
a way that is not writing off their
needs
the next thing we want to make sure
we're devoting some serious time to is
getting to know our inner children so
getting to know who we authentically are
beneath all of those layers of social
conditioning what do we actually love
and want to do with our lives versus
what are we doing because we feel like
we should do it those are the forms of
discipline that once again our inner
child is going to naturally rebel
against so if we want to tackle that
second issue of struggling strling to
make decisions we need to make sure that
we are investing enough into our
relationship with our inner child that
we're understanding why we're giving
them rules in the first place if we are
working jobs that we do not actually
enjoy working but that we think it's
good for our social status for us to
work our inner children are going to
start feeling either depressed or
anxious or they're going to start
dragging their heels every day when we
go into work versus if we're choosing
the work that we do from a place of
genuine love so we're doing something
that most of the time our inner child
actually really enjoys and feels curious
about they're going to be willing to
rise to the occasion for us more often
so the ways we can tell that we're
making decisions from that inner child
is that often our bodies feel energized
and excited and like they want to move
towards the decisions we're making
versus decisions that we make from a
place of feeling like they're what we
should do tend to feel really
constricting they tend to make us feel
lethargic or anxious in our energy and
it might start feeling really hard to
motivate ourselves even though in theory
we're picking what we think we want so
the body does not lie here one of the
most valuable things you might ever be
able to do for yourself is get in touch
with what feels like a yes in your body
versus what feels like a no in your body
and this is something that you're going
to have Tok back to time and time again
again over the entire course of your
life I still frequently have experiences
where I make a decision that I think I
authentically want but my body starts
reacting with no energy I start feeling
lethargic or anxious and I have to end
up getting honest with myself and going
you know what I think my ego really
wants that decision it really wants to
work that job or date that person or
whatever it is but my authentic self the
part of me that actually Wants What It
Wants no matter what anyone else has to
say about it does not want that thing
and then when I let that thing go it's
like all of my energy and creativity and
vitality comes rushing back to me that's
how we know that we are making a
decision from an embodied place from the
energy of authentic yes rather than this
kind of stuck cognitive energy of what
we think we should be doing the next
thing we want to look at if we struggle
with trying to get our needs met through
other people is building self trust so I
do have a video on self-abandonment so
what happens when we Outsource our needs
to other people and then another video
on rebuilding self trust after a
lifetime of self-abandonment both of
which I will link in the description of
this one and I highly recommend either
checking those out next or pausing this
video and watching them now if this is
something that you really identify
yourself struggling with but in general
what we want to be clear on here is that
we don't ever want to be interpersonally
getting our needs met at the expense of
our self-respect and integrity anytime
we do that tradeoff we do something
we're uncomfortable with so that someone
else will take care of us in some way
that we are neglecting to take care of
ourselves we lose a little bit more of
our self-respect and our self-trust and
those are two things that are crucial
for building a strong relationship
between our inner parent and our inner
child so we want to really spend some
time on this one and do some repair work
if we find that this is an area where
really struggling with when you can look
at yourself in the mirror the way you
would look at a partner who you believe
to be totally competent and go I trust
you completely I believe you are capable
of meeting my needs and I believe that
you will the relationship that you have
with yourself goes to a totally new
level I believe that's one of the
deepest forms of self- Lov we can have
is self trust the belief that we will
stay on the page with ourselves and show
up to meet our own needs even during the
periods where it feels the hardest to do
that which leads us into that fourth
Point how calm versus how patient are
you in meeting your own needs when we
have a clear idea of what our values are
so when we've really taken the time to
not only get to know ourselves but also
observe ourselves moving through life
and notice the times when for example we
picked something that we thought we
wanted and then realized we didn't want
that we were mistaken if we can make
sure that we're tracking in that through
doing frequent reflection on the choices
that we've made what's going to happen
is we develop better and better
discernment so we start to understand
what's most important to us in life not
through virtue of what we're cognitively
imagining to be most important to us but
by actually looking at the past and
recognizing which situations most
naturally brought out my aliveness and
my creativity versus which situations
did I find draining and deadening We
Gather really useful information on
making better future decisions so this
is something we can do ongoing
reflection about but it's also something
we can devote very intentional time to
so a practice I used at one point that I
found very helpful was just sitting down
and writing out periods of my life where
I felt the most energized on the same
page with myself like I wasn't
experiencing intense inner conflict and
then looking at what the common threads
were between those experiences even if
they were only a couple of days long at
a time even if they were only an hour
long at a time just starting to trace
through our history and starting to find
patterns around what energizes versus
depletes us can be a really great place
to start when it comes to getting to
know our inner children and what values
they hold and when we have a life that
is structured around our genuine values
and priorities once again we're not
going to panic as much if we have a
certain need going unmet for a short
period of time we're going to trust
ourselves to stay true to our values and
attend to that need later on when it's
appropriate for us to do so so in the
interm we can stay relaxed and once
again allow our inner child to keep
approaching our lives with that creative
spontaneity and joy and the last thing
we want to stay aware of once again to
help our children build the appropriate
skills that they actually want and need
in order to navigate the world as the
most authentic version of themselves we
have to look at which values does my
child hold or which desires do they have
that are maybe shame Bound for me so if
for example I think it's really shallow
to focus on appearance because maybe I
internalized at a young age that only
vain people care about what they look
like I might have this inner child who's
now really sad if I'm not treating
myself with dignity when it comes to how
I present myself or maybe I feel really
uncomfortable in social situations
because I've internalized that being
strong and Silent is the right way to be
and being upbeat or extroverted is the
wrong way to be but maybe my inner child
is really craving deeper connection and
they need us to help them learn how to
connect with other people in a way that
actually feels authentic to them and not
like they are just paring what other
people are doing in a way that does not
feel authentic to them so all of this
work all of these questions that we ask
ourselves and all of the answers that we
start to find for them allow us to gain
a deeper sense of who we are and how we
ought to be structuring our time and
spending our money and making plans for
the future based on the people we
actually are at our core so this is not
about imposing senseless structure and
discipline on ourselves it's about
setting up the conditions for our lives
that take the pressure off of us enough
that our inner children can actually
come out to play so giving our children
enough structure that they trust us and
are able to come fully to life through
the attuned parenting that we are giving
them all right that's all I have to say
for today on this topic but as always
let me know in the comments any thoughts
feelings questions you have coming up as
you go through this video I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and your inner children and
each other and I will see you back here
again really
[Music]
soon