hey guys heidi preeb here today we are
continuing the series of dysfunctional
family roles and we will be talking
about the role of the mascot so the role
of the mascot is not entirely dissimilar
to the role of the lost child in that
the mascot is typically but not always
one of the younger children in the
family who arrives on the scene when the
family dysfunction is already firmly in
place and they are left with the task of
figuring out how to navigate this
incredibly tense and emotionally
volatile environment but unlike the lost
child the mascot decides to take an
active role in the process so they don't
hide and retreat from conflict when it
arises they attempt to diffuse it
through humor and lightheartedness so
the mascot's unofficial job in the
family is to relieve the tension by
taking the attention off of whatever
conflict or drama is going down and
putting it on themselves in a positive
and enjoyable way so the hero does this
in a slightly different form they try to
achieve to distract the family the
scapegoat does this by acting out to
distract the family and the mascot does
this by putting the attention on them in
kind of a silly and non-serious way and
again everyone is doing this
unconsciously right the hero thinks that
they really just want the things that
they're striving for the scapegoat is
reacting to the blame that's being
placed on them and the mascot just wants
the tension to go away and they learn
very early on that using humor can help
them do that so this creates kind of an
interesting paradox to the mascot's
personality because they might seem on
the surface like they're super
good-natured super outgoing super
light-hearted but secretly inside they
are riddled with anxiety and they are
hyper alert to any cues in their
environment that something might be
about to go down that they might need to
show up and quickly diffuse using humor
so the mascot is always paying attention
and this doesn't leave them a lot of
room for other pursuits the mascot might
look like a bit of an underachiever but
they're lovable so they don't
necessarily get called out for it too
much the family might figure oh well
this kid isn't the brains of the family
but they're definitely going to get by
with their stunning personality and that
also might be the plan of the mascot
themselves but it's important to note
that this isn't due to a lack of
intelligence so it's not that the mascot
isn't smart enough or isn't motivated
enough to do the things that let's say
the hero of the family is doing or the
golden child it's just that they have
learned to be non-threatening and
approachable as a defense mechanism so
they aren't trying to put themselves in
the spotlight in a competitive way they
want everyone to feel comfortable and
relaxed around them so that conflict
does not arise in their presence and
this requires a very non-threatening
persona so like every other member of
the family the mascot very early on
learns that their true wants needs and
feelings are much less important than
the social mask that they can wear in
order to keep things running smoothly so
they're likely to play this same role of
the kind of funny good-natured guy or
girl at parties at school in
relationships and they might really
struggle with taking emotions and
interpersonal interactions seriously so
as they grow up they might struggle to
form truly intimate relationships
because relationships require a little
bit of conflict a little bit of intimacy
a little bit of tuning into each other's
needs and wants and putting them on the
table to work with
now the mascot might be a really fun
loving person to date or to be around
because they're always keeping things
light they're always making people laugh
they tend to have a knack for making
people feel really good about themselves
in their presence so they might be a
highly sought after friend or romantic
partner but when it comes to the actual
hard work of relationships they may
really really struggle because they
never learn the skills for working
through conflict that are necessary to
maintain an intimate relationship so
even in their long-term romantic
partnerships they might try to use humor
to sidestep really serious conversations
that need to be had or they might act
like everything is okay and easy breezy
and chill when actually they really need
someone to talk to about their problems
or they're really troubled by something
that's going on in the dynamic the
mascot i would imagine tends to air a
little bit more on the avoidant side
they don't necessarily develop the
ability to recognize take seriously and
work with negative emotions and they are
all about that false positive affect
that we see with the avoidant type so on
the surface the mascot looks like they
are in denial of any family dysfunction
but they are actually one of the
children in the family who tends to see
the dysfunction most clearly and this is
how they know which moments they need to
step in and make sure that a small scale
fight doesn't become an all-out war but
there is a golden rule in dysfunctional
families which is do not talk about the
family dysfunction directly so the
mascot often sees that there's some
shady things going on in the family but
they have internalized from a very young
age that if it is addressed if it is
looked at if it is brought up what
happened to the scapegoated child will
happen to them so as an adult the mascot
might have an actual aversion response
to acknowledging dysfunction or conflict
and they might feel genuinely frightened
of having difficult conversations this
can lead them to seek out numbing
behaviors in the face of dealing with
emotional difficulties so rather than
have the tough conversation they need to
have with their spouse maybe they learn
that blowing off steam with their
friends and just getting drunk with the
guys will make them forget all about the
problems at home so all children in
dysfunctional family systems are at risk
of developing addictions of some sort
but the mascot in particular has to look
out for the tendency to chronically do
whatever it is that's going to make them
feel like there's no problem because to
the mascot the problem is not the
problem people's reactions to the
problem are the problem so let's take a
step back with that when the mascot came
onto the family scene there was already
a large level of dysfunction and the
problems themselves that were operating
under the surface we're not available to
the mascot usually kids don't know or
don't understand when their parent has a
substance abuse problem or when the
parent has anger issues or when there is
some sort of adult situation that needs
to be addressed it's not blatantly
apparent to young children but the
problem that the mascot does instantly
perceive is that there is conflict like
crazy in this family and they learn from
a very young age i feel better i can
feel calm and relaxed only if i find a
way to make the conflict go away as long
as the family is not fighting as long as
things feel fine on the surface the
mascot can relax so as an adult they
don't necessarily want or feel the need
to go too deep into real problems and
find real solutions for them they look
only for the solution to the way that
they or the people around them feel if
they can ignore a problem and find a way
to make themselves feel good while
ignoring it that's just as good as
solving the problem if not better so you
can see very strong avoidance patterns
begin to develop when it comes to
dealing with the real problems in the
mascot's life and for a lot of mascots
there can be this sense of never truly
growing up so they may feel perpetually
immature perpetually like they're kind
of a good time person but not a real
adult who knows how to handle
responsibilities and respond to pressure
appropriately and some of them use this
charm to their advantage to kind of
coast in life in the tv show succession
i think that roman is a really good
example of the mascot for all intents
and purposes he is a very high achieving
individual who's working in a very high
level position in the family company but
he gets by by constantly evading
conflict by making jokes anytime
anything relatively serious is brought
to his attention and by kind of
perpetuating this persona of well you
can't take me too seriously and so no
one does there can also be a sense of
anxiety that kind of grows for the
mascot as they enter into adulthood
because the playfulness and the
fun-loving nature that everyone seem to
enjoy in youth is no longer what their
peers are seeking out so when the
mascot's friends start taking their
careers more seriously starting families
they might feel kind of lost in the
shuffle because their social role was
always oriented around being a good time
being the life of the party but when
everyone around them starts behaving
more seriously they might really
struggle to adjust to that dynamic so
the mascot like any of the roles that
air more on the avoidant side of the
attachment spectrum might be an unusual
candidate for seeking out therapy they
have learned from a very young age to
dismiss their true feelings and to take
life very lightly and make a joke out of
everything that they can't find a way to
solve and also most of the things that
they could find a way to solve but they
prefer to make a joke about but this
role just like any of the dysfunctional
family roles can really benefit from
working with a professional there will
often be a time in the mascot's life
where they recognize that it feels like
everyone is growing up without them and
for the first time they're expected to
take their lives seriously in a way that
they have never needed to and this might
be the turning point where the mascot
learns okay it's time to kind of
redefine my role they might lean in to a
secondary family role that they play
right if they were a mascot but also a
caretaker maybe they can find a way to
lean on their caretaking tendencies
through the next phase of their life if
they were the mascot but also the hero
maybe suddenly they start taking their
career a lot more seriously but if there
is not a secondary role for them to fall
back onto the mascot might really
struggle to find their place in the
world and this is where they will really
benefit from the guidance of a
professional who can help them tune in
to who they are beneath this good time
veneer and really figure out what it is
that they want in the world it's
interesting because the kind of
stereotype that comes to mind here is
the comic right the stand-up comedian
who never grows up they make their
living off of playing off tense
situations to make people laugh but also
comedians are notoriously known for
substance abuse issues for struggling to
find a sense of direction and for really
struggling to find a true place in the
adult world and i think that that's a
really good example of the challenges
that the mascot child faces if they
don't learn to start taking themselves
more seriously and start seeking out
role models or mentors or someone who
can support them therapeutically as they
transition into the next phase of their
lives that jokes and lightheartedness
alone will not help them get through so
if you see yourself in the mascot role
it's really important to note that you
might be downplaying the way that you
truly feel you might really want that
sense of direction that sense of taking
your life and yourself seriously that
you see your peers having but you might
not know how to access it in yourself
and in that case like with any of the
roles finding professional help can be
very instrumental recognizing that you
are now in a safe environment to explore
that side of yourself and that you don't
need to constantly diffuse tension
because conflict can be safe
conflict can be productive conflict does
not necessarily mean that this cycle of
drama will go on forever
if you are surrounding yourself with
people who are not dysfunctional so like
many of these family roles finding the
right social circle who can support your
growth into a more serious version of
yourself is going to be extremely
helpful for the mascot your friends and
family might be very used to you not
taking things seriously and so when you
start making moves in the direction of a
more serious and disciplined life there
might be a little bit of pushback from
other people who are uncomfortable that
suddenly you aren't diffusing all the
tension you aren't constantly brushing
everything off if you're taking things
seriously that means they should be
taking things seriously and so like any
of the rules the people around you might
start trying to push you back into that
role of the light-hearted good-natured
funny guy or girl you have to be aware
of that and in many cases just
acknowledging it helps just letting
people know that that role is something
you're starting to move out of in
transition into a period of your life
where you want to take yourself
seriously for the first time that might
be an uncomfortable conversation for you
and it might be an uncomfortable
conversation for the people around you
but the people who truly care about you
will always support your growth in
whichever direction is right for you and
for any of the family roles that's an
incredibly important thing to keep in
mind people who are used to connecting
with you through humor alone might need
another avenue for connection so try to
find some shared interests with them
invite your friends to new activities
that you're taking an interest in talk
to them about the new life that you're
building for yourself giving yourself
permission to show up interpersonally in
a way that is not just humor and jokes
and avoidance tactics is going to take
some practice but it's going to be worth
it because for the first time in your
life you're going to start experiencing
deeper and deeper connections all right
i think that's all i have to say about
the mascot for today as always let me
know in the comments if this is a role
you identify with or if you see it in
your own family thank you guys so much
for watching this series let me know if
you have any questions and as always i
love you i hope you're taking care of
yourself and i will see you back here
again soon
[Music]