hey guys heidi preep here today we are
continuing the series of family roles so
we've already talked a little bit about
all of the roles but today we're going
to go in depth about the role of the
family hero so the role of the family
hero is one that is often but not always
determined by birth order so very often
the family hero is the firstborn child
however i've also noticed there can be a
bit of a pattern of the firstborn child
of either gender taking on the hero role
depending on what the parents
expectations are based around gender now
to recap the role of the family hero is
to distract outsiders from the
dysfunction going on within the family
system by being achievement oriented so
the mantra of the hero of the family is
we couldn't possibly be anything other
than a nice normal family because look
at what a good kid i am if i came from a
dysfunctional home would i be able to
get straight a's or be a star athlete or
lead the youth group at my church or
whatever it is that the hero perceives
might throw people off the scent of the
family dysfunction and like all of the
family roles the hero has been
conditioned since birth into their role
so they learned very early on that if
they are to externalize their sense of
self and channel all of their energy
into achieving things and making the
family proud that will be their route to
acceptance within the family pia melody
who does awesome work in the field of
love addiction and codependency drew
parallels between some of the family
roles and attachment styles and she
noted that the family hero is often
avoidantly attached so from a young age
they may have learned to tune out from
their sense of self not pay attention to
what's going on in their true emotional
experience and instead do whatever they
believe is expected of them from
outsiders in order to blend in now this
doesn't necessarily mean that if you are
avoidantly attached you are the family
hero it does not mean if you are the
family hero you are avoidantly attached
we also absolutely see achievements
driving on the anxious attachment
spectrum because a lot of the time that
love that attention that validation that
isn't coming from the family unit
anxiously attached children learn they
can glean from outside of the family
unit if they perform very well so this
can be one way or the other but also not
all people who are achievement oriented
are the family hero the family hero is
the child who serves the specific role
of taking the heat off of the
dysfunction in the family by giving the
parents something to focus on that is
positive which is the child's
achievements so what's interesting about
this role and about avoidant attachment
in general is that in a lot of ways it
is kind of encouraged even revered by
north american culture so being a
workaholic is a point of pride in north
america right so unlike some of the
family roles like the scapegoat where
there is negative attention being drawn
onto the behavior the role of the family
hero often kind of flies under the radar
nobody realizes that something's going
wrong for this child that they have
detached from their sense of self
because on the surface they look kind of
like the ideal child they're happy
they're upbeat they're highly motivated
they're good at what they do they're
proactive go-getters and these are all
traits that we really value in the
western world however on the inside the
family hero is struggling with extreme
perfectionism extreme fear of making a
mistake the extreme pressure not to let
their family down because unconsciously
they believe that the glue holding their
family together is their achievements
and this can be a lot for a child to
cope with and it also becomes something
they internalize as they grow into
adulthood so the family hero from cradle
to grave unless something drastic
happens to change it along the way is
often hyper-consumed with thoughts about
achievement with perfectionistic ideals
and they are preoccupied by how they
believe everyone else is perceiving them
so they don't really have a strong
internally assembled sense of self they
take their cues from how others are
reacting to them to decide how they feel
about themselves if others are approving
of them they must be good if others are
disapproving of them they must be doing
something wrong so they can be very
sensitive to how they're being perceived
now just like in childhood in adulthood
the true wounds of the family hero often
go completely unacknowledged because the
way that they're showing up in the world
actually looks admirable to other people
right i remember being at an attachment
seminar at one point and someone's
saying someone who's like an expert in
attachment theory saying sometimes
avoidant attachment is actually quite
adaptive because so many of the most
successful people in the world have
gotten to where they've gotten to by
virtue of their ability to detach from
their inner emotional experience and
they wouldn't be so successful in
whatever field they've thrown themselves
into if they were preoccupied by having
the normal range of human emotion
and i had to stop and be like um
just checking in are we conflating
success with happiness and a good life
because there is very often kind of an
inverse correlation between worldly
financial success and true inner
satisfaction and happiness they've done
studies on this so just because we
believe that something looks admirable
does not mean that the person
experiencing that thing is having a
positive experience of it and this is
very often the case with the family hero
here's why the family hero is absolutely
driven down to the core of their very
being by the feeling of not being good
enough the reason they have this feeling
and they are driven so strongly by it is
because they internalize the belief that
if i were good enough if i achieved
enough if i met enough of my parents
expectations the family dysfunction
would cease to exist now this is of
course
a false conclusion however it's one that
drives the family hero well into their
adult lives so there can very often be
this feeling of insatiability for the
family hero no matter how much success
they achieve it's never enough no matter
how much money they make it's never
enough no matter how good their life
looks on the outside it never feels
fulfilling on the inside and the reason
that it never feels fulfilling is
because the true goal of the family hero
is to end the family dysfunction and
pain and because as a child that family
dysfunction and pain was less present
when they were achieving things because
the focus was on them instead of on the
parents fighting with each other
fighting with the other children
whatever it is those moments of
achievement provided temporary relief
that in their young mind they decided
would last forever if only they could
keep that achievement train rolling
forever but of course this is not how
things work in real life children
achieving certain feats does not bring a
family unit together in a healthy and
holistic way because to truly bring
people together requires intimacy and
intimacy requires a deep connection to
the self and the ability to share that
self with others and this is precisely
what the family hero does not know how
to do but there is a reason why the
family hero does not get in touch with
their inner world and their true
emotional experiences and it's because
if they were to be tuned in to their
true emotions their emotions would point
them in the direction of the family
dysfunction because there would be pain
around that and the hero has made a
lifelong mission of numbing out and
ignoring that family dysfunction their
achievement orientation serves what pete
walker who is a cptsd specialist would
call a redemption fantasy a redemption
fantasy is this idea that all of the
pain we experience through our early
childhood wounding could someday be
erased by the existence of a perfect
loving harmonious relationship that we
find in the future whether that's with
our parents whether that's with a
partner doesn't matter the redemption
fantasy is about how we want to feel
which is loved accepted valued all of
the time and the ironic part about this
is that the only way to form a truly
loving and intimate relationship the way
the family hero secretly craves is to
show up with vulnerability but because
the family heroes early experiences of
connection were mostly oriented around
people applauding for them or praising
them they confuse praise with love and
that's a dangerous thing to mix up
because when someone is in awe of
someone else if someone is clapping for
you or admiring you they are not getting
to know you right they aren't actually
seeing you and so you can't have a truly
close and intimate relationship so that
sense of closeness and connectedness
that the family hero wants on a deep
level is never going to show up for them
until they learn to let go of this idea
that they can win love through
achievement because all they're doing in
that case is putting themselves up on a
pedestal that no one else can reach so
the family hero might look kind of
narcissistic from the outside but more
often than not they're actually just
trying through the only means that they
understand to achieve love they think
that other people want to be impressed
by them so instead of showing up and
trying to share who they actually are
they get in the habit of putting on a
show for other people and they really do
think that that's the way they're going
to get connection so something i've
noticed about people that fall into this
family role is that whether or not they
step out of it in adulthood is kind of
contingent upon whether or not the
strategy stops working for them so again
because there is this sense of
insatiability to the hero role because
what they're truly looking for is not
something they can get through
achievements some of them will burn out
really hard as adults they could develop
issues with addiction or the stress and
pressure that they put on themselves
could overwhelm them to the point where
they really have difficulty coping day
to day and often it's only on the other
side of something like this happening
that they'll start to deconstruct for
the first time why it is that they're
putting all of this pressure on
themselves and that can actually be a
really great place for them it will feel
like the end of the world it will be a
massive ego death but it can also be the
starting point of them tuning into their
real feelings for the first time in
their lives so if you recognize yourself
in this role there are probably a series
of obstacles that are going to come up
as you move towards healing that you're
going to have to be aware of there's
often a very pervasive underlying sense
of either anxiety or paranoia that the
family hero feels because they believe
that if they let anyone down for even a
second no one is going to care for them
no one's going to be there for them
because in their minds their ability to
receive love and their worthiness for
receiving love is contingent upon them
making other people proud so initially
there may be a lot of anxiety if the
family hero starts working on themselves
and realizes they have to let some
commitments go interestingly a lot of
family heroes can also be big
hypochondriacs because they are so
afraid of their health impacting their
performance and if their performance is
impacted you know the rest of the story
they don't get loved they're cast out
socially they're alone so this can be a
double-edged sword because those
feelings of paranoia anxiety
hypochondria will be your mind's way of
trying to reel you back into your family
role if you try to start stepping out of
it so you have to be aware of that but
the brilliant thing is that a deep sense
of peace and relaxation that the family
hero has probably never known
is on the other side of that healing
when you realize as the family hero that
it is possible for you to be loved and
accepted and in harmonious relationship
with other people not because of what
you do but because they love you simply
for the fact that you exist there can be
this massive sense of relief that
accompanies that realization that might
allow you to relax in a way you did not
know was possible in life but a really
big external stumbling block or red flag
to watch out for is the fact that you've
probably spent the majority of your life
building relationships that are somewhat
transactional in nature so often you'll
see the family hero kind of come to this
realization point that they don't want
to go on this way they want something
real they want a truer experience of
life but they'll have this fear of maybe
my spouse will leave me and a
psychologist might go oh no no you know
once you learn to show true intimacy and
vulnerability it'll strengthen your
relationship but maybe not right maybe
your spouse was also their family hero
and they also are seeing this
relationship as transactional the way
you once did right so you might have
some truly transactional inauthentic
relationships in your life that you will
have to let go of if you want to start
showing up more honestly and giving
yourself the chance to form true
intimate connections it might mean
switching up your social circle
considerably so there might be some very
real loss involved in the healing
process for the family hero
but there is also something humongous to
be gained on the other side which is a
true sense of connection that you have
always been gunning towards but never
actually had the tools to aim directly
at you will get an a-plus in the realm
of human connection which is where
you've been wanting the a-plus the
entire time you just we're denying it to
yourself like i'm sorry but fame and
financial success are just stupid
concepts that humans invented is a
crappy stand-in for love when they
couldn't find it like if anyone knows
jeff bezos's parents and can get them
into therapy we could probably reverse
climate change and end world hunger by
like
next thursday
just saying but anyways to kind of wrap
this up the family hero role is one that
i think does not get the focus and
attention it deserves because the family
hero looks so fine on the outside if
anything they look like they're thriving
based on the broken ideals of the
culture that we live in but the family
heroes like all dead inside so they need
help just as much as anyone else if you
are the family hero like any of the
dysfunctional family roles your first
step should be seeking out mental health
support ideally finding a counselor who
understands and can speak to you in the
language of family roles could be super
helpful in helping you to unlearn the
unhealthy aspects of the role that
you've taken on last thing i want to say
before we go the family hero and the
golden child have many similarities but
they are not the same role some people
kind of group them together i see them
as separate so we are going to talk
about the golden child in a different
video but just note that there will be a
lot of overlap here and that very often
the hero and the golden child are the
same child because one child can play
multiple roles but not always okay that
is all i have to say about the family
hero for today leave any questions you
have in the comments if you're the
family hero let me know in the comments
i'm really curious about which of these
roles you guys identify with and how
that has shown up for you over the
course of your life alright i love you
guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and i will see you back here
soon
[Music]
you