hey guys i'm heidi priebe and on this
channel we talk about myers-briggs
personality types attachment styles and
every other type of theory that helps
you understand yourself and other people
better as well as how to bridge those
gaps so as many of you already know i am
an enfp myself
i wrote the enfp survival guide and i
also run a six-week enfp soul bootcamp
course for those of you who are looking
to learn to play to your natural
strengths more effectively as an enfp
and what i wanted to talk about today is
what emotional maturity looks like for
an enfp because it has been a topic that
has been on my mind for a while a few
weeks back i made a video called
unhealthy versus healthy enfp and i want
to differentiate between the concept of
health and the concept of maturity so
healthy versus unhealthy in terms of our
overall holistic health as enfps i see
more as something that will fluctuate on
and off over the entirety of our lives
so you can be a 10 year old enfp or a 95
year old enfp and you can be at various
levels of health depending on what's
going on in your life but when i think
of maturity i'm thinking specifically of
how well a given enfp has integrated or
failed to integrate the lessons that
they've learned in their lives so for
most of us maturity comes with age and
we continue to mature throughout the
entirety of our lives for other people
certain life experiences can shape
certain parts of us earlier than others
so that we can develop a sense of
maturity in some areas that others might
have to wait more time to arrive at and
some of us may struggle with maturity
the whole way through i think that it is
an ongoing process but what i wanted to
talk about is what emotional and kind of
holistic maturity looks like for an enfp
relative to another type i think that
growing up a lot of enfps kind of have
this idea of what a mature person looks
like and they think that it means
getting rid of who they are at their
core and learning to operate in the
world in a way that is kind of almost
the opposite of who they are for an enfp
emotional maturity is going to look much
different than it is for an isfj or an
istp or another type who does not share
our cognitive processes so this is not
about shaming any of us for not being in
any of these places yet it is more about
just providing ourselves with guideposts
of what might start to happen as we move
through life that are a measure of us
moving into the next stage of who we're
gonna be so without getting us further
into the weeds sign number one of
emotional maturity in an enfp is that
they have stopped pretending to be who
they are not and they have stopped
feeling chronic shame over the way that
they operate
now this is not necessarily something
that all enfps start out with right if
you were raised in an environment where
perceiving and being intuitive were more
accepted and nurtured in you you may
have come out of the gate thinking of
the way that you operate as a strength
and you may have always felt comfortable
showing up in the world exactly as you
are and that is a wonderful thing
however
many enfps because we live in a society
that was kind of built for sjs for the
most part really think that emotional
maturity for them is going to mean
learning to live as though they are an
estj or an istj means that they are
going to have to finally settle down and
stop having all of these different ideas
and thoughts and things that they want
to work on it means they're going to
suddenly no longer have wanderlust no
longer have a million different plans
for the future and this is either good
or bad news for some of you but from my
experience
knowing enfps later on in life i can
guarantee you that those things do not
go away they just become steadily more
refined with age and also we stop
expecting them to go away so when i talk
to enfps who are in their 60s or 70s or
anywhere past kind of mid-life what i do
not see is people who have turned into
s-i-doms what i do see is people who
understand that having a million
different ideas and loving to try out
new things and kind of looking at life
as this all-you-can-eat buffet is not
something that has to hold you back it
is an inherent part of who they are it's
what keeps them identifying as a
lifelong learner and most of them feel
very comfortable with that aspect of
themselves in a way that a lot of
younger enfps might struggle to accept
as you grow and gain perspective as any
type you start to learn what
opportunities lie within your struggles
and what i've really noticed with a lot
of older enfps is that the commitments
that they made that when they were
younger they were so afraid was going to
bog them down and keep them from
pursuing other things in life ended up
being the building blocks for so many
other possibilities for so many other
doors that they opened in their lives so
for example they may have feared early
on that getting married and starting a
family was going to kind of tie them
down and keep them away from the life
they wanted to live and then later on in
life they realized no that was me
expanding my life starting a family just
meant bringing more people i love into
my world and getting to watch them take
on new opportunities and getting to help
them source new adventures taking that
job that i was afraid was going to bog
me down ended up opening all of these
doors to other things that i wanted to
learn and experience and grow through
buying that property ended up grounding
me in a community of people who ended up
bringing immense value into my life so
one of the most beautiful things that i
often see with enfps who have had a
little bit more life experience is that
ability to see things that they once
thought would drag them down as opening
more doors and they don't ever expect
themselves to stop opening doors i know
one entp in particular in his 70s who
just recently went back to get his
bachelor's degree in computer science
because he decided that he wanted to
start his career over as a developer
this past year i met someone who is
either an enfp or an esfp but definitely
had that kind of joie de vivre that you
find with exfp types hiking who does a
solo hike every single year and i met
him on his 80th birthday when he was
exploring a new trail on his own and i
think that all of these examples end up
serving the point that as we age we end
up opening more doors for ourselves and
growing calmer and calmer in the
understanding that there's no one
particular route that is going to give
us everything we want in life but there
are opportunities and possibilities down
every road so the process of integrating
those past experiences as an enfp allows
us to grow calmer and calmer in the
knowledge that we're not supposed to
give up or stop being who we are as we
grow up if anything it just gets easier
for us to show up more as ourselves in
the world because we have more past
experience to draw on and we now know
how to manage our energy in a more
holistic way i guess that's a fancy way
of saying that we kind of find our place
in the world a little bit as our lives
go on and in a lot of cases probably
also get a lot more comfortable with the
understanding that we will carve our
place out wherever we can't find it sign
number two of an emotionally mature enfp
is that they use their introverted
feeling for self-awareness rather than
using it to react to every feeling that
comes their way so young enfps tend to
take their introverted feeling and the
data that they're getting in their
introverted feeling as fact and think
that they have to act on every emotion
that comes through their mind now of
course our feelings matter and of course
we need to act in accordance with the
way that we feel so that we're not
fighting against ourselves our entire
lives but i think that the more enfps
grow and develop the more they learn
that fi is actually this unique process
for us in that having it as our
auxiliary function means we're a little
bit more detached from it than the
average person so we have this ability
to both feel strong emotions but
also very keenly observe them from the
vantage point of our extroverted
intuition understand and unpack them and
i find that as enfps age if they become
intentional about honing that
mindfulness skill they can become some
of the absolute most self-aware people
out there and they can also be very
adept at communicating that
self-awareness to other people and if
you are a young enfp this is also
probably a huge relief because when
you're young as an fi auxiliary type
your emotions can feel very overwhelming
your experience of life can feel very
overwhelming and it can really feel like
you have to react to everything that
comes your way as you grow you will
learn emotions are information and if we
can take that information and learn to
evaluate it in the right way and figure
out which pieces of information are
really good pieces that i really should
be acting on and augmenting and trying
to find more of in my life versus which
pieces of information are either faulty
inaccurate or not serving me and how do
i manipulate that data to make sure that
i'm getting more of what i want more of
what helps me move towards the life that
i'm interested in having and less of
what's keeping me stuck and i think that
as enfps grow up they really do learn to
have more of a friendship with their
introverted feeling for kind of lack of
a better term when you're young it can
feel more like you're at the mercy of
your emotional life and as you age you
can learn to grow into that part of
yourself develop more of an inner adult
that manages your inner emotional world
and you have the capacity to develop an
incredible amount of self-awareness
which i really think ends up driving you
deeper into the human experience right
because the more we're able to observe
witness sit with and integrate our
emotions the more authentically we end
up experiencing them when our emotions
are really intense and hitting us from
every angle we're not really savoring
them right but mature introverted
feeling can do that it can really pick
out what matters and focus deeply on it
and that is another sign of a really
mature enfp sign number three of
emotional maturity in the enfp is that
their habits support their spontaneity
rather than impeding upon it so this is
the difference between someone who feels
like they are constantly at war with
their inferior function so that their
introverted sensing is always trying to
take them away from their extroverted
intuition versus the person who has
learned to get their introverted sensing
to serve their extroverted intuition and
we've talked a little bit about how this
works from kind of the ground up in the
videos that i've put out about enfp
productivity and motivation but the end
result of this is that you end up
building a life full of habits full of
routines full of rituals that really
serve you becoming more and more
yourself so once you get that
introverted sensing stuff to kind of run
on autopilot once you're no longer
spending so much of your energy figuring
out how to feed and clothe and put a
roof over your own head or trying to
eternally unpack the next career move
you have more time to focus on what you
love which is the exploration of new
ideas and new experiences and you may
have figured out that the healthier i am
the more i keep myself in a routine that
allows me to maintain what feels good
for me on a physical level the more i'm
able to engage with the parts of life
that i really enjoy you might find out
that the more i make a practice out of
retaining new pieces of information or
engaging with new friends or whatever it
is that really lights you up the better
i'm able to navigate the challenges and
hardships that life throws my way so the
routines and rituals that you have built
your life around no longer feel like
they're taking away from what you want
out of life it feels like you are
augmenting your ability to live a deep
rich fulfilling and meaningful life and
i think there's also something to be
said about the fact that the longer you
go on in life the more you learn who i
am is not going away so how do i show up
as an adult in a way that really
supports my inner child there will
always be that part of you that is so
excited so joyful so curious right and
if you can design your life as an adult
would design the life for a curious
child where you have your physical needs
met you don't have to worry and stress
out about safety and survival and now
you can just let the child within you
play within this beautiful life you've
created for yourself that is such a
strong sign of emotional maturity in the
enfp it's almost like the more your
childlike self is coming out in your
day-to-day life and the more you've
created an environment where it's safe
for you to do that the more that shows
your maturity what's that quote like it
takes a very long time to become young
something like that definitely applies
here sign number four of the mature enfp
is that they know what they don't know
and they're able to check their blind
spots so when we are young there's
another quote here i'm bad at sourcing
my quotes today um but someone once said
when you only have a hammer every
problem looks like a nail and i think
that that is so crucial for everyone of
any personality type and isdp will
always look at the problems in their
lives as how can i ti my way through
this or how can i see my way through
that particularly when they're young and
an enfp will always look at problems and
go how can i n efi my way through this
as you grow up face more challenges you
are inevitably going to come up against
problems that you cannot any f i t e or
s i your way through you're going to
learn there is a time and a place where
i really need to use extroverted feeling
extraverted sensing introverted thinking
and introverted intuition and you do
have enough of a grasp on those
functions that you can learn to kind of
hone them to serve the strengths of your
more dominant functions this is
something again we talk about in the
enfp's whole bootcamp course so we go
over each of your shadow functions and
talk about how to gain just enough
awareness of them to help you serve the
interests of your dominant functions but
there will also be cases where you just
need to outsource certain things where
you just need to go ask for help borrow
someone else's tools for a little while
or figure out how to set up a system in
your life in such a way that you don't
have to fe or ni that hard that often
but you're also not mucking up the
process by trying to fi your way through
something that requires fe or whatever
it is right so you're aware of where
your blind spots are as you grow up and
go through new experiences as an enfp
and you are comfortable knowing what you
don't know admitting what you don't know
and kind of setting up some safeguards
around that so that you're not
necessarily working at a disadvantage
when you're encountering something that
your dominant four functions do not
really serve you in tackling so there's
a sense of humility that develops just
like we know more and more who we are as
we grow up we also know more and more
who we are not and who it's okay that
we're not and what battles we can just
kind of lay down and go this is not mine
to fight and find some things we're more
aligned with sign number five of the
emotionally mature enfp is that they can
balance their decision-making process
between te and fi so when we are young
as enfps what we often do is one of two
things we will try to either over rely
on intraverted feeling and do only the
things that we want to do follow our
hearts kind of to our own detriment in
many cases and that's totally fine it's
a part of the learning process and b a
lot of fun sometimes but then there will
also be this kind of kickback effect a
lot of the time where once we have
followed our hearts for long enough
we're like okay now it's time to get
serious time to cut all of the fun out
of my life be this kind of very straight
narrow person and it takes us a long
time to learn how to do a little bit of
both of those things
at the same time so finding the career
that both really lights you up inside
but also pays your bills honing a
romantic relationship to the place where
the spark is kept alive but your world
is not burning down being spontaneous
enough that things stay interesting but
not to the point of self-destruction
right and the good news about this is
that the more you grow as an enfp the
more it's going to feel good to find
that balance center it is really fun
when you're young to live in extremes
right and i don't think that any of us
should stop trying to do that if we're
not seeing real consequences of it and
we enjoy living that way right get away
with that for as long as you can but you
will probably find as you grow up and as
you integrate a little bit more of that
s.i and find yourself wanting a little
bit more stability that you're going to
start seeking out kind of natural middle
points between those two decision-making
functions where you're able to
understand how you can use your emotions
to guide your decision-making process
and then use your thinking functions to
get you the thing that you want so fi
decides what you want te sources it for
you and you have a kind of constant
feedback loop between those two things
that might start out as like 75 percent
fi dictating 25 percent te delivering
and then slowly shift over the years
until it's more of a 50 50 split and in
that case you might find that a lot of
the time you are getting happy by making
the decision that makes sense which you
may never have thought would be the case
but i've heard distant rumors that it is
sometimes sign number six of the
emotionally mature enfp they have
learned to show up as their authentic
selves without being off-putting so this
is something that i hear and see enfps
struggling with quite a bit they feel
like they either have to hide who they
are and completely blend in with other
people by pretending that they're
someone that they're not or they have to
be their authentic selves in a way that
other people find very overwhelming and
intense and off-putting and i think that
the longer we go through life as enfps
the more we find a way to kind of put
that panic down and learn to show up as
who we are without that social mask
without making other people
uncomfortable because we start getting a
little bit more in touch with
extroverted feeling so whenever i hear
someone saying to me like i don't know
how to be authentic without freaking
people out whenever i show up as who i
am it's too much i'm too loud i'm too
emotional i'm too full of ideas and i
exhaust other people i think that part
of what that is is that we're not tuned
into extroverted feeling so we're not
always noticing what specifically it is
that's actually making other people
uncomfortable and that's a really big
thing like maybe what you think is
happening is that they don't like you
talking about all your ideas but
actually what's happening is that
they're just feeling a little bit
self-conscious because you haven't asked
them that many questions about
themselves and maybe they're feeling
like you're actually not that interested
in them or maybe and i am going to make
a video that more specifically addresses
this if you feel like you are too
emotional for other people it's possible
that there's some emotional
self-regulation skills that you didn't
learn early on in life and that it would
actually help you to start working
through and these are all tools that we
pick up on along the way that allow us
to have more authentic interactions
without kind of putting people off but
it's also possible that you air a little
bit in the other direction in that you
have shame around who you are as an enfp
so you tend to blend in really hard and
have trouble bringing your true self and
your true ideas and thoughts into
conversation and this is another thing
where i've noticed that many enfps as
they grow up end up kind of finding the
communities the group the work
environments where their true self
shines in right and the more that you
can seek out those places for yourself
and form relationships where you truly
are seen and appreciated for who you are
and the way that you show up and process
the world the less painful it feels to
tamper yourself down and blend in a
little bit more in the few situations
where that still feels like what you
have to do as long as you feel known
seen accepted and celebrated for the
person you actually are in at least some
environments it doesn't necessarily feel
as important to be able to do that all
of the time right so this is less about
learning to temper yourself and more
about finding the places where you are
accepted nurtured and celebrated and
leaning into that as much as you
possibly can last sign number seven of
the emotionally mature enfp is that they
are picky about the experiences that
they invest in so again this is
something that can only come from a
lifetime of having indiscriminately
explored experimented gone down every
alleyway or pathway that we found
remotely interesting you start to
develop a palette for which types of
experiences and which aspects of being
alive you really like and want to repeat
so i have an interview in the enfp soul
boot camp with dario nardi and he talks
about how as the enfps grow up they
actually develop a little bit of taste
which i thought was very funny because
i've been joking my entire life about
having no taste but what i mean by that
is that i have so much curiosity and i'm
so open to so many different avenues of
experience that i don't have a lot of
things i really hold myself back from
but as you grow up you do start to learn
more through trial and error and that
trial and error absolutely has to happen
first which things are more consistently
a hit for you and which things are more
consistently amiss and you can use that
information to start building meaningful
rituals into your life that allow you to
really flourish as the person that you
are and this brings us all the way back
to the first point right i think that
with enfps it's kind of this process of
like emerging into the world fully as
yourself figuring out where that doesn't
doesn't work hiding yourself for a
little while and i don't think this
should be the case right if this was not
your experience that's a great thing but
i think that many enfps go through this
experience of feeling like they have to
kind of temper parts of themselves tone
themselves down to try to fit into
society but as you grow up i think that
there can be this re-emergence of the
self as you go through life and start to
realize there are certain places where i
can show up as myself how do i put
myself in more of those rooms how do i
learn to use my other functions in order
to design a life for myself where the
parts of me that naturally energize me
are able to come out more and more and
more often and so instead of fighting
myself i am more and more learning to
wake up to myself and to design my life
around the person who i authentically am
so i think that the older an enfp gets
in the best case scenario the more enfp
they get does that make sense we learn
how to use our skills in such a way that
we can find a way to structure the rest
of our lives around those things that we
truly enjoy and that light us up and
that make us feel completely and totally
present which is something that early on
in life we can struggle to be it's
almost like the older we get the better
we become at being the parents for our
inner children that we needed when we
were actually children and when we were
actually learning to navigate a world
that wasn't necessarily built for us all
right that is all i have to say for
today if you have any thoughts or any
signs of emotional maturity in the enfp
that i did not mention and i'm sure you
do because this list was so far from
exhaustive please leave them in the
comments i always love hearing from you
guys i love you i hope you're taking
care of yourselves and i will see you
back here again really soon
[Music]
you