So the brain wires not only around the
real-time interactions that we have with
the people in our lives, but neurons
also fire in a particular way when we
are expecting to have a certain
interaction with someone. So for
example, I once had a long-distance
relationship where every night around
9:00 my partner would call me and we
would talk on the phone for a couple of
hours usually before we went to sleep.
And when we broke up, I noticed that
every night at 9:00, there was a part of
my body that was expecting that call to
come in. So there were neurons firing
that had mapped out what to expect on a
day-to-day basis from being in
relationship with this person. These are
the same type of neurons that fire in
our brain to keep most parts of our
reality consistent. I expect that when I
open my bedroom door every morning, my
hall is going to be there. My brain is
already preparing itself while I'm
opening that door to see and smell and
hear the creaking floorboards of that
hallway. It would be a shock to my
system if I opened my bedroom door one
day and the hallway was gone. And the
same thing happens in our bodies when we
get really used to interacting with a
person and learning to expect consistent
interactions with them which suddenly
are no longer happening. So, the early
stages of grief are kind of like
chronically reaching the last stair of a
staircase, thinking there's one more,
going to step on it, and having our foot
kind of drop onto the floor below us.
It's surprising because our systems are
adjusting to this person no longer being
around. And this is going to happen over
and over and over again in tiny moments
as we move through the grief process. If
we are experiencing grief cleanly,