hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel we
are talking about a term that I am
really excited to be talking about
intimacy is kind of The Guiding word in
my relational life right now for the
majority of my life I avoided intimacy
like the plague it was probably the
single scariest thing I could imagine
having with another human being and
after years of doing a lot of work in
the attachment space I am finally at a
point where having emotional intimacy
with the people I'm close to feels
really exciting and like a goal that I
want to be pursuing pretty much full
time in my relational life lately so in
this video I want to talk about some
stuff that's come up for me on route to
developing more intimate connections and
some patterns I've started noticing
around what seems to keep people away
from intimacy even in situations where
it's what they claim to want or in
situations where it's genuinely what
they do want so before we dive into all
of that I first want to go over the way
that I personally Define intimacy so I
Define intimacy as the act of being
present with another person in their
undefended state and allowing that
person to be present with you in your
undefended state so what this translates
to is being known in so much as it's
possible to be known by another human
being so when you are interacting with
them you're not hiding anything you're
not trying to give them a certain
impression about you that is not true
you are allowing them to see you as you
are in both your good and your ugly
parts and vice versa so I want to put
that out there as the operational
definition of intimacy for this video
since that is the way that I personally
Define it now I think there is a single
tool that can allow us to get really
quickly to the heart of intimacy in most
interactions however it is a heavily
underutilized tool in the society we
live in and we're going to talk about
why but before we get there I want to
talk about what happens that keeps most
of us out of intimacy see or stuck in
the realm of intimacy even when we want
to have those deeper connections and to
do that I'm going to refer to a model
that's commonly used in the practice of
authentic relating authentic relating
has this model that they call the three
levels of conversation so level one is
the informational level we're just
talking about kind of objective facts
things that are happening we're not
putting much of ourselves into the
conversation at this level so even if
you're talking about something that is
related to you you're not really telling
the other person any part of your
subjective experience of that thing they
might ask you what did you do today and
you can tell them I went to work I came
home I made soup for dinner and I went
to sleep right that's all informational
even if it's personal information
level two of relating is the personal
level so this is when we start sharing
some of our subjective feelings or
emotions or thoughts about the
information so what did you do today and
how did you feel about it is a more
personal question than what did you do
today well I went to work today and I
was a little frustrated about this one
project I'm working on it with my
co-worker Brian and we don't always see
eye to eye so that can be a little bit
stressful and then I came home and I
made soup for dinner I was checking out
this new recipe from this one website
that I really like and I think the
person who runs the website is really
good at meats and vegetables but not so
great at soups so I wasn't super happy
with the outcome but I was pretty happy
that I got to go to bed early tonight
because I've been pretty exhausted for a
while and it felt nice to have a night
where I could finally catch up on sleep
now we're on the personal level right
you're actually understanding more of my
own subjective feelings and thoughts
about what's going on for me as I go
through the day and for a lot of people
this is about as deep as we ever go with
our relationships I would almost start
argue that most people live their entire
lives not ever really taking it Beyond
this level in their interactions with
even the people they're really close to
but the third level the one where
intimacy really starts to develop is the
relational level
on the relational level we are talking
about what it's like to be having the
direct experience that we are having in
the moment we're having it what is it
like to be me telling you about my day
today yeah sitting here telling you
about my day I noticed that my heartbeat
starts to speed up when I think about my
relationship with my co-worker Brian and
I'm noticing myself feeling worried that
you're going to judge me and think that
maybe I'm not contributing enough to
that relationship or it's my fault that
we're in conflict and I'm also kind of
trying to find some ways to impress you
I want you to think I'm a good cook I
want you to think I have my life
together I want you to think that I'm
responsible and I'm distracting myself a
little bit with those thoughts and
sharing that with you now I feel a bit
embarrassed and I'm noticing myself not
wanting to make clear eye contact with
you
all of that stuff all of the what is
happening for me right now in this
moment in relation to you is the real
intimate stuff
that's the stuff we normally never share
most of us get pretty comfortable
sharing our thoughts and feelings once
we first filtered them quite a bit and
found socially acceptable ways to share
them but very few of us let people in on
what's actually happening for us in the
moment including how our experience of
being with another person is having an
impact on that present moment experience
however this level the relational level
of conversation is where we build true
intimacy because we start to understand
not just who the person is and what goes
through their mind but also what their
real moment-to-moment experience of
being alive and being alive in our
presence is like for them and that's
about as aligned as we can possibly be
with another person in any given moment
understanding what it's like to be them
at that moment through their subjective
lens that's a really deep form of seeing
and being seen by someone and it's also
a really really vulnerable way to be
seen by someone and because of that as
well as for some other reasons we're
going to get into a lot of us shy very
naturally away from staying on that
relational level especially when the
stakes start getting high so when it
comes to that relational form of
relating this is something that
personally I've practiced a lot in
workshops between authentic relating
radical honesty certain meditation
practices I've done and in most not all
but most of those cases the stakes have
not been too high at least initially
because when I first entered those
environments in all cases I was in a
room full of people I didn't know who
had no prior conceptions of me and so
the truth about what it felt like for me
to be with them when I would share with
them was usually just something along
the lines of oh my heart is beating
quickly I'm noticing that I'm
uncomfortable with people looking at me
right now but because they were people
who initially I didn't have a close
pre-existing relationship with it didn't
feel that vulnerable yet where it gets
more vulnerable is let's say you're
talking to to your partner and you're in
a conflict or you're talking to a family
member and you're at a tense moment most
of us will instantly and quickly Veer
far away from the relational and even
avoid a lot of the personal and what
we'll do instead is try to stay on the
informational level but a lot of the
time what we're trying to do
unconsciously is take the personal and
relational and make it informational so
if I'm in a partnership and I'm having a
fight with my partner and I tell them
you don't care about me that's an
attempt at an informational statement
right I'm not in that statement I'm
telling them something that I think is a
fact about them
but what am I subtly trying to weave
into that probably something along the
lines of I feel really neglected or
lonely in our relationship lately and
sharing that with you right now I feel
terrified my heart is beating my hands
are sweaty I have this story in my head
that you're gonna think I'm too much
that I'm overwhelming you and that
you're going to abandon me
relational
present moment
right it's really hard to say those two
things it's a lot easier to say you
don't care about me like it's a fact and
for most people the kind of Norm around
conflict in our society is to keep
things on the informational level so
then we try to start loading up our
informational statements with our
personal subjective feelings and
claiming that we're being objective and
that's where things get really really
murky and hard to resolve most
relational problems can only really be
solved at the relational level
or at the least at the personal level
but the problem the reason why so many
people have trouble dropping down to
that relational level is because it
requires a certain tool that is really
difficult for a lot of us to access and
this tool is the one that more so than
anything else will allow us to quickly
and effectively build intimacy with
another person if we can learn to trust
ourselves to use it and that tool is
curiosity
specifically curiosity that stems from a
relatively undefended psychological
space in ourselves
this sounds simple it is one of the
single hardest things a human being can
do is to sit with another person and be
truly curious about the full range of
their experience and open to whatever
that brings up for us now a lot of us
are very curious on the informational
level maybe we're highly intellectual
maybe curious is a word that we have
been associating with ourselves from
birth right maybe we're always Gathering
facts trying to learn new things maybe
even with other people we ask them
hundreds of informational questions
anytime we're in their presence and
maybe we're also very interpersonally
curious maybe we're used to asking
people questions about what they think
and feel about different things and
again that might be a trait that we've
associated with ourselves for a very
long time however to be relationally
curious is a very rare thing and the
reason it's rare to be relationally
curious is because it means that if we
are delving into someone's true
moment-to-moment experience and that
moment-to-moment experience for them
includes their full unfiltered
perceptions of us and what it's like to
be with us in a given moment there's a
really high potential there for
something to arise that's going to feel
painful what if there's something they
don't like about us what if there's a
judgment they're making about us what if
there's a fantasy we have about the way
the other person thinks about us that
it's going to turn out is untrue if we
get their true unfiltered thoughts what
if there's a fantasy we have about the
other person and how we want them to be
inside of our own minds that's going to
get busted if they tell us what it's
actually like to be them true relational
curiosity is the absolute power tool of
building intimacy however fostering
relational curiosity requires us to be
capable of a being in an undefended
state with another
being present with another in their
undefended state having the discernment
to know when it's relatively safe to be
in such a state with another person and
having the self-protective skills to
know how to take care of ourselves and
tend to our own wounds if something
painful comes up as a result of being in
that state as well as how to draw
boundaries if we go into that state with
someone and it turns out maybe they
weren't the safest person for us to do
that with after all so what seems simple
and what might be simple on the
informational and personal level is
actually a very complex skill on the
relational level and I believe this is
why a lot of people do not have deep
fulfilling intimate relationships
because that level of curiosity and
vulnerability and ability to tend to our
wounds when something painful happens
when we are vulnerable like that with
someone so not having an attachment to
the way that somebody is perceiving US
requires high level emotional maturity
very high level because you can try this
and be Reckless at it sometimes what we
think is relational is actually just a
projection and it requires a certain
amount of emotional maturity to be able
to stay with someone on the relational
level and truly own our experience so if
I'm sitting with you and I'm thinking a
nasty thought about you and my first
instinct is to tell you that nasty
thought I'm having about you instead of
pausing and going where is that coming
from in me
right what is my experience and why is
my brain coming up with that thought and
is there a more true more vulnerable
experience I could share in this moment
that's actually about me and not the
other and how do I get in touch with
that those are the skills of safely
operating this emotional power tool
right I could probably talk for like 50
hours about that but for now I'm going
to move on to why a lot of us don't have
that sense of curiosity why it's so
difficult for a lot of us to get into
this state of curiosity on a relational
level
my budding hypothesis about this is that
we live in a culture where a lot of
connecting has become about impressing
each other we live in a social media
infused world and I think that for a lot
of people there is this sense of if I'm
on a first date with someone I'm not
just competing with like the three other
people in town who are my age and single
and out on the market I'm competing with
everybody out there who has an Instagram
account everybody out there who this
person I'm sitting across from could
possibly come into contact with and in
the digital age that is a massive amount
of people so what happens we go into
this kind of threatened State and when
we're in a threatened State we're not in
a state of curiosity
right curiosity comes from being calm
and relaxed and open and when we are in
our minds going oh my God how do I make
sure that they know that I am better
than that person they follow on
Instagram that I make as much money as
that other person they make go on a date
with that I'm a better conversationalist
than their last three Tinder dates that
I would make a good future partner or
that I would not make a good future
partner and I hope they don't get too
attached when we are in that state of
defense and of trying to impress someone
all we are really thinking about is our
own self-image
right what do I want to make known about
me in this interaction
how do I want them to perceive me and
when we're in that threat State it's
really hard to stay open and curious
about the other because our attention is
going to where our survival system
thinks it needs to go which is on us and
how to present ourselves and I want to
make it very clear I think this is a
large scale social issue I think a lot
of people are running around calling
everybody a narcissist and at a certain
point we just have to go I think we have
a cultural problem here
I think that the state of the world is
leading many of us to be in a constant
threat state where we are trying to
impress people instead of be present
with them however that presence and that
curiosity is the very thing that allows
us to Foster relationships that actually
feel meaningful and that last but if we
are constantly trying to manage our own
images in other people's minds which are
culture heavily endorses at this point
in history we're going to start
developing internal fears about the
emotions and the thoughts and the
feelings we have that we judge to be
shameful the fear of feeling shame can
close us off to a lot of genuine deep
authentic interactions that we could
have with other people and so indirectly
it keeps us away from intimacy I was
reading a thread on Twitter today where
someone was saying why don't men ask
more questions on dates and there is a
whole bunch of discourse about this and
I want to be clear I don't think that's
it's a problem that's exclusive to men I
think that on average there are
differences in the way we socialize men
and women that might mean this problem's
a little bit more explicit to one gender
than another but I think the problem
runs deeper than that I think a lot of
people are scared to get to that more
intimate level with people because
they're afraid of what they might find
out about themselves if they go there
what if I find out something that hurts
me
and if I don't know how to process
emotional pain and emotional hurt I'm
going to try to avoid the whole
situation
and again we also don't live in a
culture that teaches people to be
present with pain and emotional hurt and
so that's another tool that needs to get
developed if we want to stay deeply
relationally curious about people
accepting that intentionally or
unintentionally we will probably at some
point in the intimacy process pump up
against something that hurts or that
feels uncomfortable or that we don't
want to look at and if we want true
intimacy with another human being we're
going to have to learn how to process
feelings of discomfort and shame and
hurt sometimes that's going to mean
drawing a boundary with another person
other times it's going to mean just
facing the things in ourselves that we
are really afraid to face and trusting
ourselves to be able to take care of
ourselves in that process but the
problem is if we are avoiding all topics
of intimate conversation that could bump
us up against something we feel ashamed
about inside of ourselves we're going to
end up avoiding a lot a lot of
relational information and all of that
stuff all of that present in the moment
experience that when we are in
relationship we end up keeping to
ourselves and our partners or our family
members or our friends end up keeping to
themselves that's the stuff that
eventually makes you feel really lonely
inside of close relationships
right like there's a whole world of
experiences and emotions that I'm having
in relation to this other and they have
no idea and maybe I have no idea of the
whole world of experiences that they're
having in relation to me and so getting
to that level where we can use our
discernment to figure out who is it
reasonably safe for me to be in that
undefended state with and then when I'm
there how do I truly stay present with
another person
how do I truly tolerate the difficult
emotions that might come up
all of this is a process and in future
videos we're going to talk about how to
start working this process so that we
can get into the basement of our own
psyches and figure out how to deal with
what comes up when we're down there so
that we can start inviting other safe
people who we trust into the basement
with us and then it doesn't feel as
lonely down there and then we actually
have real authentic intimate connections
with people and the first step in this
process is developing self-intimacy
so figuring out which parts of ourselves
we're afraid to look at that we keep
hidden from ourselves that we have
shoved away in a drawer in the basement
and thrown away the key to right
self-intimacy has to proceed
interpersonal intimacy and so later this
week we're going to talk about what
self-intimacy looks like and how you can
begin developing it so that you
understand what's in that basement that
you eventually can share with someone
else as well as what's on the top floor
that's flooded with sunlight right the
entire psychological house has to come
into play and for some people one part
is going to be easier than the others
some people have all of their shame and
deepest darkest secrets in their
basement other people like to lead with
the basement and what they're actually a
little bit ashamed of is the fact that
they have like three sun rooms in the
back that they don't really tell anybody
about because maybe those people have a
fear that if people knew I were
resourced and could keep myself okay
they would abandon me so whatever it is
that we're afraid of other people
learning about us is exactly directly
what we need to confront in order to
develop intimacy again with the trust
that the people were doing this with
will be able to treat us tenderly in
that process and vice versa and this
eventually requires us eradicating to a
reasonable extent the fear of
spontaneous feelings this is again
something we're going to talk about at
length in a future video one of the main
differences between those who air more
secure on the attachment spectrum and
those who are more insecure is that
those who have secure Tendencies are not
particularly afraid of feeling things
spontaneously and this allows for a lot
more curiosity in most interactions
because if I go into an interaction
knowing if my feelings get hurt I still
have a relatively stable sense of
self-esteem I have other people who love
me I know how to self-soothe myself
through difficult emotions so I can go
in with a lot of curiosity and if it
turns out someone says something hurtful
to me or I find out something I don't
like I trust myself to be able to deal
with that feeling of pain of my pride
being wounded did whatever it is and
recover from it in a relatively
resilient way securely attached people
tend to be the most psychologically
resilient people because there's no
specific range of emotions that they are
hiding from themselves when you are
insecurely attached or when you have
toxic shame or when you have unresolved
trauma in some form spontaneous feelings
are terrifying more often than not which
is why a lot of the time you see a lot
of kind of rigid behavior from people
across the insecure attachment Spectrum
whether it is those on the anxious side
of the spectrum trying to control other
people's responses to them or try to get
other people to feel a certain way about
them or perceive them a certain way or
those on the avoidant side of the
spectrum getting really rigid in their
behaviors and in their routines and the
things that they do to self-regulate
both of those things are ways of
avoiding spontaneous feelings avoiding
the feeling of hurt avoiding the feeling
of rejection avoiding the feeling of
Shame if you don't know how to integrate
those emotions when they show up you're
going to spend a lot of your life
frantically trying to avoid ever
encountering them and that's going to
keep you away from fostering true
intimacy with another human being but
where we get to that really good stuff
is when we're able to exist in a space
of undefended relational curiosity with
another person when much of the time
when we're relating with them we can
talk openly about what it's like to be
ourselves in this exact moment the
question how are you doing takes on a
completely different form when you drop
it from the informational to the
relational level it might drop it from
I'm feeling okay A little tired today
to who I have been in a kind of
dissociated state all day
and I don't know why and as I'm talking
to you I'm having a hard time honestly
staying completely present with you I'm
really somewhere else in my mind and
body right now and that opens the door
for the other person to be curious with
you about you
right
intimacy requires it to work both ways
so I can receive what it's like for you
to be you and also I can tell you what
it's like for me to be me and that's how
we end up building those really deep
really honest connections and the more
we can practice this over the course of
our lives with the people we're close to
the more we grow those connections into
incredibly powerful tools that we can
use to understand not just ourselves and
not just the other but humanity and the
nature of Being Human at large every
person's direct experience of being
alive is a gold mine of information
about The Human Condition that so few of
us ever access in a direct way because
we're all just afraid of being honest
but the more honest we all get the more
we also realize it's not all that
different for each of us a lot of us are
having very surprisingly similar
experiences of Being Human we just don't
know it because we're too focused on the
impression management and so few of us
have ever really learned how to relate
on that deeper level but it's a
wonderful tool to start building and
we're going to talk a lot more about how
to do it
all right that is all I have to say for
today on intimacy what tends to keep us
away from it as well as what it takes to
really drop down to that level where
we're able to connect on a very direct
human to human level with another person
if you have any questions comments
thoughts experiences you want to share
please leave them in the comments
section of this video as always I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children and I will see you back here
again really soon
thank you