hey guys heidi preeb here happy new year
this is a video that i made at the end
of last year reviewing the best books
that i read in the year and i decided to
do it again this year because one of the
number one questions that i always get
asked is what books do you recommend on
like whatever topic i cover whether that
is dysfunctional family roles whether
it's attachment style whether it's
myers-briggs there are no myers-briggs
books in this video so if that's what
you're here for you might want to exit
now this year i read a ton probably
more than i've ever read in a single
year in my life so i attempted to make a
list of the 10 best books that i read in
2021 turned into a list of the 12 best
books because i could not narrow it down
to 10 and then i also include something
like 10 more honorable mentions so it's
a list of like 25 books but i will try
to keep it kind of short as short as i
can and hopefully some of these
suggestions are helpful for you guys if
you're looking for ways to further your
own knowledge of a lot of the topics
that we talk about on this channel in
the year 2022 so before we get started i
don't want to make the books feel bad so
i just want to add the disclaimer that
to me a good book is a book that changes
my way of thinking about something so
when i'm ranking these books internally
i'm not necessarily thinking about like
what is the most eloquently written book
or which book packed in the most
information in the least amount of time
i'm thinking about which books did i
read that personally really made me
think about things in a completely
different way and so some of these books
ironically may have been much higher up
on my list had i read them in a
different order for example so take this
list with a grain of salt because it is
completely subjective as is every
individual's list of their favorite
things but i am here to share my
subjective opinions so here we go 12th
best book i read this year was the book
bradshaw on the family by john bradshaw
if you watch my videos you hear me
constantly reference john bradshaw he
was an incredible psychologist who talks
a lot about family dynamics and who
introduces a really wide range of family
systems in a very accessible way so if
you have let's say watched my
dysfunctional family roles series and
you want to start getting a little bit
more into family roles or if you are
just curious about family dynamics in
general john bradshaw gives a really
good overview in this book that will
point you to different systems that you
can research more and he is very
accessible to read he speaks really
clearly and really directly to the
layman you don't need all of this
complex psychological background to
understand anything he writes he is a
very talented and a very accessible
writer so this book bradshaw on the
family is a really great intro to
dysfunctional family
stuff 11th best book that i read this
year i read this one on audible so i
cannot show it to you with my hands but
the pocket guide to polyvagal theory by
stephen porgis so this book is not the
most accessible book in the world it is
written by a neuroscientist for other
neuroscientists but he's tried to kind
of trim it down and make his work a
little bit more accessible in this guide
and the reason why i recommend it is
once again not because it's a super
entertaining read but because polyvagal
theory is starting to pop up everywhere
in psychology so if you are interested
in psychology you're probably going to
see this theory referenced quite a bit
and this book introduces it in a very
thorough way there's also a book called
befriending your nervous system by deb
dana that i never finished but i started
to read that offers a much more
accessible intro to polyvagal theory i
just don't feel comfortable recommending
it cause i only read like two chapters
and then i was like i think i'm maxed
out on polyvagal theory stuff for this
year but i recommend getting into the
theory because i think that especially
if you have an interest in family roles
attachment style stuff you're gonna see
this theory popping up over and over and
over again and it really does give you a
bit more nuance and understanding of how
the neurobiology of attachment and
interpersonal psychology really affects
us on a physiological level so it's
really cool to have that kind of layered
approach to it so that made it book
number 11 for me book number 10.
i want to put a huge disclaimer in front
of this book is super sexist and super
homophobic and the reason it is both of
those things is because it was written
in i believe 1964. you can fact check me
on that but it was a while ago and this
was a time when homophobia was still in
the dsm as a mental illness and there
was rampant sexism in the media so there
are a lot of tropes in this book that
absolutely would not fly in modern times
but if you can take that with a grain of
salt it is a really interesting read and
this book is called games people play by
eric byrne
now this book is an intro to the field
of transactional analysis and the field
of transactional analysis is once again
one that is super closely related to
attachment and this book talks a lot
about the subtext that's going on
beneath the surface of everyday
conversations and i really wanted to
include this in my top 10 even though i
felt like it should come with a giant
disclaimer because it really helped me
to think differently about the
conversations that i was having with
people about these kind of cyclical or
repetitive interpersonal problems that i
would have in certain relationships and
it helped me gain language for why i
kept running into the same roadblocks
with certain people or why in certain
cases in the present or the past i
couldn't break a dynamic even though i
knew it wasn't serving me so the field
of transactional analysis kind of talks
a lot about what conversations we're
really having when we have certain
conversations so if you've ever had the
experience of like having a giant fight
with someone and then being like that
fight wasn't really about that this book
maps out a whole bunch of different
games that people are actually playing
out in relationship with one another and
that often lead to these kind of big
blow up like fights or conflicts or
whatever it is that don't seem to make
any sense so it's kind of taking your
average everyday conversation and going
beneath the surface of it in a way that
is very interesting and even if you
don't take the book completely literally
like if you don't see yourself in the
specific games they're referencing it
just helps you think in a very different
way like going into a conversation that
feels frustrating or difficult kind of
has a different context to it once you
start getting versed in transactional
analysis and understanding it in a
little bit more depth so if you like the
drama triangle if you've read the book
the drama triangle or if you like my
videos on the drama triangle i think
you're also going to like games people
play because it's very similar the field
of transactional analysis very much
includes the drama triangle that was
book ten right yeah i've already lost
count okay book nine the book mine sight
by daniel siegel and i recommend this
book mostly because i just want everyone
to get into danielle siegel people are
always asking me for attachment book
recommendations and i'm always like
just don't read attached that is truly
the worst book on attachment i've ever
read it completely and totally
bastardizes the theory i'm not going to
do my whole rant on it i might make a
video that it's just a rant on that book
in the future but i do have this
struggle where i don't have a single
book on attachment that i feel
comfortable recommending to people at
this point other than like my textbook
that is a thousand pages long but daniel
siegel is an author who has written
something like 50 books like if you go
on amazon and look up dan siegel you
have pages and pages and pages of amazon
pages for his books and mindsight is not
an attachment book but it is a really
good intro to dan siegel's work it talks
a lot about how we can use
self-awareness and the science behind
self-awareness to understand ourselves
to improve ourselves to gain just better
clarity on the human condition and i
think that it is a really great book for
anyone who's just interested in getting
an intro to neuropsychology without
knowing anything going in so i found his
books very easy to read i had to read
some pages multiple times to get it to
fully sync in but daniel siegel is just
such an amazing author who has so many
good things written about attachment and
about the neuroscience of attachment
about how children's minds develop and i
think that this is just a good book to
start familiarizing yourself with his
work and it's just a great psychology
book like it's really great for
understanding how the mind works and how
self-awareness develops book number
eight is the one that i read the most
recently i think i read it like the
second last week of this year so it just
snuck in under the wire but it is the
betrayal bond by patrick carnes and this
is one that is not directly related to
attachment either but i think that if
you identify as either anxiously
attached or fearful avoidant this book
is a really fantastic resource it talks
about how early wounding can cause us to
repeatedly and continuously seek out
relationships that are exploitive either
in one or both directions and this is a
really common problem for people who are
insecurely attached of any attachment
style so if you are insecurely attached
the betrayal bond can be a very
enlightening book i really recommend
that you do the exercises there are some
really powerful self-reflection tools in
this book so if you actually use those
tools for their intended purposes you
can get a lot out of it book number
seven is definitely the most like
esoteric book on my list
maybe but it is conversations with god
the complete trilogy by neil donald
walsh so this is basically a book by a
guy who claims that he's channeling god
i believe he used to be really heavily
involved in the church and then he left
the church so if you go to the amazon
reviews you will see that this book does
not translate perfectly to christianity
and it offends a lot of christians on
the contrary but as someone who is more
or less agnostic i found it to be a
really fun thought experiment so it's
basically a three book long conversation
between this man and his idea of god and
they tackle all of the major problems of
the world and what god thinks about them
and again this is not the christian
ideal of a god it kind of actually
reminded me of there is a book called
god's debris by scott adams was that his
name yeah scott adams he wrote the
dilbert comics and then wrote this book
that was a thought experiment about what
if god basically had disintegrated and
we were all just like little debris or
pieces left over of god trying to
reassemble itself that's not the exact
philosophy here but it's not too
dissimilar it's also very similar to a
course in miracles if you're at all
familiar with that material which we
will get to later in this list but it is
considerably less
theology heavy like it references
christian literature quite a bit because
the author comes from a very christian
background but it's not preaching
christianity but anyways i would kind of
categorize it as philosophical and i
think that it presents a lot of really
interesting perspectives that are really
fun to think about book number six the
body never lies by alice miller so you
probably know alice miller from the book
the drama of the gifted child which
absolutely everyone seems like who's
ever taken a passing interest in
psychology has read i remember reading
that book and being like i don't know
this didn't do that much for me why is
everyone so crazy about alice miller and
then i read the body never lies and i
was like oh this is why everyone's so
crazy about alice miller she is was a
phenomenal psychologist just decades
ahead of her time like she was talking
about trauma and complex trauma without
naming it that years before that ever
came on the scene and she unfortunately
is now dead but she left behind this
legacy of books where it is a crime in
my opinion that the only one that's well
known right now is the drama of the
gifted child because she writes
spectacular books on religious trauma
and this is one that i would say is kind
of half about sexual abuse half about
religious trauma so if either of those
are topics of interest to you i really
recommend this book my personal favorite
part of the book was the fact that she
really deeply unpacks the phrase you
shall respect your father and your
mother which i think is used in a lot of
families as a justification for parents
maltreating their children and then
using that phrase as a kind of get out
of jail free card and she talks a lot
about how that creates a very complex
inner world for the child as well as a
lot of other phrases that are used in
religious conditioning so if you have
any sort of religious trauma or if
you're just interested in exploring it
as a topic i highly recommend alice
miller i also know she has a book that's
on my bookshelf that i haven't read yet
called for your own good that i believe
tackles physical abuse and she just does
such a good job of translating how these
dogmas and these ideologies that get
passed down through generations really
create internal conflict in children and
also how it teaches them to kind of
police their own thoughts in a way that
is very unhealthy so body never lies by
alice miller is a great place to start
even if the drama of the gifted child
did not blow you away book number five
back on the topic of spirituality a
return to love by marianne williamson so
i read this book for the first time in
2018 and i put it down about three
quarters of the way through and was like
this book is not the book for me at this
time in my life but i knew in the back
of my mind there will be a time in my
life where this will be the book for me
i don't know if you've ever had that
feeling i've had that with a couple of
books including ones i read this year
where i was like i don't feel ready for
this book yet i don't feel aligned with
this book right now but i can tell that
the concepts within it will someday be
important to me and that's how i felt in
2018 when i read a return to love and
then when i read it this year i was like
this is the year that i'm ready for it
this book is basically a condensed
version of the book a course in miracles
by
helen shukman schumann chukman i can
never say her name right but um
basically marianne williamson studied a
course in miracles which is a
religious text depending on who you ask
and took the main ideas and wrote them
down in this book and after rereading a
return to love this year i was like okay
i'm gonna go check out a course in
miracles because the ideas in marianne
williamson's summary of it were so
powerful for me so i read half of a
course in miracles and if you've ever
picked that book up you know it is a
crazy long book on audible i think it
was like 50 hours long and i listened to
half of it and realized that i should
have just stopped at a return to love
because a course in miracles is super
interesting but it's also very very
um
inaccessible like it's just the concepts
are presented at such a high level with
absolutely no groundedness to them that
it's like you can read it for sure but
marianne williamson honestly in my
opinion just did such a good job of
condensing it and making it very
accessible and easy to understand and
presenting the idea of spirituality of
faith of god in such a down-to-earth way
that i honestly think i got 10 times
more out of marianne williamson's book
on a course in miracles than i did out
of the actual course in miracles and i
want to note at this point i am not
religious myself i can't remember if i
already said that probably but marianne
williamson is jewish and so some of her
work has kind of a jewish bent to it but
honestly not really like she does a
really good job of talking about
spirituality in a way that is not
dogmatically rooted in any one religion
so even if you are completely
non-religious i personally really
enjoyed this book and i think that it's
possible to enjoy it as someone who
doesn't have a faith whatsoever book
number four that i really love this year
the narcissistic family by
stephanie donaldson pressman and robert
m pressman what i really love about this
book is that it tackles the issue that a
lot of people have which is i don't feel
like i grew up in a dysfunctional family
i feel like i came from a pretty stable
normal family but i recognize myself in
a lot of the symptomology of children
who grew up in dysfunctional homes so
this book talks a lot about the kind of
subtleties behind families that seem
normal on the surface but actually can
create a lot of psychological damage to
the children so the term narcissistic in
this title does not mean a person with
narcissistic personality disorder the
narcissistic family just means a family
that is oriented around serving the
needs of the adults above the needs of
the children so this can happen for a
variety of different ways i will not
unpack the whole book for you but if
you've ever had the feeling of i feel
like i have these kind of weird either
trauma responses or just issues that i
see people who grew up in like alcoholic
homes or something like that struggling
with but i don't feel like my family was
overtly abusive you should check out
this book it gives a really good
overview of how seemingly normal
families can give way to some really
dysfunctional patterns and it also does
talk about more overtly dysfunctional or
abusive homes so it covers both bases
third best book i read this year and we
are back to bradshaw healing the shame
that binds you by john bradshaw this
book is just phenomenal i have half of
it highlighted it talks about the role
of what psychologists call toxic shame
or a shame-based person so someone who
believes that at their core they are
kind of a mistake or fundamentally
different from other people in a very
shameful way and that if anyone got too
close they would find out and this is
the root of all attachment wounds so if
you identify as insecurely attached in
any way whether it's avoidant fearful
avoidant or anxious this book gives a
really good overview of what is kind of
emotionally at the core of that and how
to start working with that shame by
bringing it to the surface making it
conscious and then finding a way to
develop an identity for yourself that is
not rooted in deep shame it is just such
a good resource that tackles a topic
that hardly anyone is willing to talk
openly about and i seriously cannot
recommend this enough this is such a
good book just so good second best book
that i read this year if you are
following me on twitter you've probably
already heard me mention this about a
billion times but
the fantasy bond by robert w firestone
i don't know if a book has ever truly
changed my worldview as much as this one
and that is saying a lot this book
really messed me up like i felt like
glass was shattering in my brain left
right and center reading it and there
will truly i do not say this lightly
forever be a before and after i read
this book in my life so the fantasy bond
once again is not directly related to
attachment but it talks about the ways
that we adapt ourselves to make up for a
lack of healthy true connection in the
relationship we have with our caregivers
and how as adults that causes us to put
fantasy in place of actual relationships
as adults whether that means not having
relationships so that we can keep the
idea of the person we think we're going
to end up with kind of pure and
preserved in our mind or constantly
being in relationships where half of the
relationship is happening inside of your
head in the world that you've invented
and even though it's not overtly about
attachment i truly think that this was
the book that helped me understand for
the first time in my life on a deeply
felt level what secure attachment is
supposed to be like and what it's
supposed to feel like and i think that
before i read this book i couldn't even
conceptualize in a really kind of bone
deep way what it would feel like to be
secure and this was truly the first book
that gave me a concept of that and that
was monumental instrumental completely
necessary in my own healing process this
year and i feel genuine love for this
book like it is a human being who i
personally know which is also fun to
think about because books have
personalities and this book's
personality is harsh and bleak but very
illuminating for my myers-briggs crowd
this book is a giant ti dom probably an
intp all right book number one i don't
know whether to tell you that this is
the best book i read this year or the
best book that i read ever in my life
but it's definitely the former maybe the
latter and this book once again you've
probably heard me reference a million
times if you follow me on twitter but it
is complex ptsd from surviving to
thriving by pete walker so when i first
read this book i remember tweeting we
should just replace the entire dsm with
this book which was kind of a joke but
only kind of i really think that in five
to ten years from now the way that we
look at trauma is going to completely
revolutionize the way that we deal with
absolutely all mental health disorders
and this book we are going to look back
on as
so far ahead of its time it's absurd but
you do not have to identify as having
ptsd or complex ptsd to read this book i
definitely did not identify as having
complex ptsd before reading this book
and then i got so much out of it that i
became like anxiously attached to this
book i'm not even kidding like for a
period of about two months i took this
book literally everywhere with me it
introduced me to the idea of emotional
flashbacks which people with complex
ptsd have and that concept and being
able to name it and understand how to
work with it is maybe one of the best
mental health tools that i've ever found
anywhere ever so he has what he calls 13
steps for managing emotional flashbacks
which are one of the core symptoms of
complex ptsd that i'm gonna make an
entire video unpacking because they are
so good that for a period of two months
i brought this book with me everywhere
like i just put this book in my backpack
and
time i left my house for more than 24
hours i brought this book with me i went
on weekend trips with this book i went
hiking with this book i brought this
book on bus trips and airplanes i would
not go anywhere without this book for
two months because it was such a
humongous resource for me mental
health-wise that i literally felt like
this book has to be on my person at all
times so again i'll probably make a
video about this book in particular but
it just goes over so many different
mental health issues in such an
intelligent and nuanced way that i
actually recommend it for literally
anyone who in any way struggles with
mental health issues of any sort again
you don't have to identify as having
ptsd or complex ptsd but if you have
ever had a mental health issue
especially if you have ongoing or a
plethora of mental health issues this
book is so good so good just go get it
don't even listen to me talk about it
anymore
okay now honorable mentions so i divided
the honorable mentions up into four
categories and they are spiritual books
creativity books productivity books and
psychology books so spiritual books the
places that scare you by pema children
that was a great book i think last year
i recommended when things fall apart by
her she is nfp crack if you are an enfp
or an infp or like any type but i think
particularly enfps 9fps will find that
her writing style is very conducive to
the way that nfps think i would bet
money that one of those two types are
hers as well but she is a buddhist monk
who lives in canada and she has some
amazing work so the places that scare
you is a really good overview of how to
sit with discomfort and how to tolerate
discomfort which if you're on an
attachment healing journey in any
capacity is going to be incredibly
important for you and this is a really
good book to help you navigate that next
spiritual book that i finally read this
year that i can't not recommend the
power of now the power of now is one of
those books where it had been
recommended to me so many times that i
just started telling people i had read
it so they would stop talking to me
about it and then for a while because it
was so commonly recommended to me i just
didn't read it because i felt like i'd
already read it so many people had told
me about it um but this year i finally
read it and i was like god damn it it's
a really good book it's really good yeah
i'm not going to tell you any more about
it because you've probably either
already read it or had it explained to
you 5 000 times but i'm just here to
tell you that it does live up to the
hype if you're wondering whether or not
it lives up to the hype as i was before
this year and this one i didn't know
whether to put in the spiritual or the
psychology category but the book why
buddhism is true by robert wright was
also a really good read it just talked
about how the principles of buddha's
philosophies even if you don't ascribe
to the religion itself is really great
for helping us live a more healthy and
balanced life it probably should have
been in the psychology category but
anyways it's a really good book and i
like that it was written by someone who
self-identifies as being terrible at
meditation and who is not a naturally
zen person i think that robert wright is
probably also an np maybe like an intp
so if you've ever felt yourself being
kind of attracted to buddhism but
thinking i'm not calm enough i'm not zen
enough i can't meditate well enough this
is a really good book that talks about
how to approach it from that angle um
creativity books so i finally read big
magic this year by elizabeth gilbert i
didn't like eat pray love so i was like
i'm not gonna read big magic i don't
really think elizabeth gilbert speaks to
me then i started following her on
instagram and was like oh everything she
says speaks to me on here so then i
bought big magic finally and it was a
phenomenal book and i recommend
listening to it on audible if you can
because she narrates it and the way that
she speaks and the emphasis she puts on
certain parts is actually just like very
nice to listen to you can really tell
which parts of her own book she loves
the most and is the most proud of and i
thought that that was just kind of cool
i think in particular that if you have
fi if you are an enfp infp isp or esfp
this book is going to be really good for
you because it talks about creative
energy in a very down-to-earth way it
kind of like takes a zoomed out
perspective on the life of creative
people and isn't just about like here's
how you sit down and get to work it's
about like how you live your entire life
in a way that helps you be creative
overall so it's not just about producing
it's about living creatively and i think
that that's a really unique thing in a
book about creativity so i do highly
recommend this book next creativity
classic that i finally read this year
from beginning to end the artist's way
by julia cameron if you are a writer in
any capacity and for some reason you
have not heard of the artist's way you
definitely want to go pick it up but
it's also just a really great book for
thinking about creativity from any angle
so if you're a creative of any sort and
especially if you are a creative of any
sort who is looking to form some sort of
routine around their creativity some
sort of spiritual practice around their
creativity the artist's way is a very
famous book that provides a very
well-renowned system for keeping
yourself kind of creatively sharp and it
also just presents some really cool
really interesting ideas so i totally
recommend picking it up if someone has
not already gifted it to you i feel like
it's a very commonly gifted book and for
good reason last creativity book um the
war of art by steven pressfield well i
can't remember if this was in the road
less traveled or
the war of art i read them both on the
same day on audible so it's like i know
it was in one of those books that i read
that day i think it was the war of art
um they talk about using relationships
as a distraction from creativity in the
creative process and i thought that that
was a really interesting angle to take
but the war of art kind of talks about
resistance to creative work in a way
that i found very helpful as someone who
has dealt with a massive amount of
creative resistance in my life i would
actually say that's a very prevailing
theme for me so that's something you're
struggling with the war of art is a
great read for that productivity books i
did not read many of this year and the
ones that i did read are kind of the two
like
top ones that people recommend for
productivity um one is atomic habits by
james clear i've recommended this
multiple times in other videos it is a
really great book on being aware of the
habits that you are forming without
realizing you're forming them and how
you can upgrade your habits and make
them sustainable by making them things
that you actually want to do because
they feel like extensions of who you are
so it's a really great book i think for
intuitive perceiving types like myself
who can struggle with keeping habits
afloat because it talks about them in a
pretty realistic way that's all i'm
going to say about that the other one i
read is deep work by cal newport you
have probably heard a bunch about this
book already but it talks a lot about
how to focus deeply by reducing
distractions and also by making sure
that you are setting clear boundaries
between when you are working and
focusing and when you are letting your
mind wander and play because both of
those things he argues are very
important for concentrating and i have
found that to be incredibly true so once
again if you are wondering whether or
not those two books live up to the hype
they do and last but not least my
psychology honorable mentions okay i've
already talked about this one in the
family scapegoating video called
rejected shamed and blamed help and hope
for adults in the family scapegoat role
by rebecca c manville if you identify as
the scapegoat in the dysfunctional
family roles system highly recommend
picking up this book it gives a really
good overview of what that might mean
for you as an adult it cross-references
pete walker's work on cptsd with the
family scapegoat role just an awesome
book overall highly recommend picking it
up if you are curious about
dysfunctional family roles mother hunger
by kelly mcdaniel this is one of those
books where if i had read it earlier in
the year i feel pretty certain it would
have been on my top 10 list so this is a
new book i believe it came out in 2020
and it talks about a range of different
attachment related theories and brings
them all together in a really
comprehensive really easy to understand
way and i highly recommend this book if
you have an interest in attachment style
it's a phenomenal read and it's very up
to date with all of the latest theories
it also incorporates a lot of polyvagal
theory i believe if i remember correctly
so it's got all of the newest research
so it contextualizes stuff in a really
cool way and it's just overall very
interesting and well written the upward
spiral by alex corb read it if you have
depression it talks about little
day-to-day changes you can make that can
reverse the kind of downward spiral of
depression and help you start getting
slowly and slowly into a healthier
mindset by making tiny incremental
changes and it was a book that i read at
a time when i was feeling depression
kind of creep back into my world view
and i really did find it quite helpful
for both reframing what was going
through my mind at that time and also
creating small kind of structural
differences inside of my own life that i
implemented to carry me through that
period that really did help me kind of
keep my head above water this is another
one i've recommended multiple times but
adult children of alcoholics by janet i
can never say your last name right
garinger woodtitz i think i got that
right you do not have to be an adult
child of an alcoholic in order to
benefit from this book it just gives an
overview
of symptoms that you might be facing if
you grew up in any sort of family
dysfunction you could have grown up with
a completely sober home and you could
still super relate to this book so if
you relate to anything in either the
cbtsd book or the narcissistic family
book i think that you will find this
book to be a very natural extension of
those ones and it's super short it does
not take long to read at all also note
that it was written quite a while ago so
there are some outdated components to
this book and last but definitely not
least the book homecoming by john
bradshaw is a really nice introduction
to re-parenting work so if you are
interested in doing any sort of inner
child work but you don't know where to
start john bradshaw gives a really good
overview of how to start picturing and
thinking about your inner child and he
is a very
nice writer like he just explains things
in a very kind of soft and compassionate
way i think he was probably an nfp and
this book is a really good intro to that
okay so those were my books of 2021 that
i really loved i will obviously be back
here next year with a list that is
hopefully a little bit shorter than this
year's but if you are still here
watching at this point kudos to you for
sticking around and let me know in the
comments what the best book that you
read this year was i am actually really
curious about what you guys are reading
because if you're here we probably have
very similar interests and i would love
to know love love love to know what
books you guys found were awesome
resources for you in the year 2021 and
maybe that will make it into my next
year's best books of 2022 reading list
but for now happy new years i love you
guys and i will see you again back here
next year
[Music]