hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here every year for the past
2 years on this channel I have published
a video about the best books that I read
in the past year so I did my favorite
books of 2020 my favorite books of 2021
and then at the end of 2022 I finished
writing my dissertation and did
absolutely nothing for the rest of the
year so someone pointed out to me the
other day in the comment section that I
never made my favorite books of 22 video
and I thought better late than never so
I'm going to use this video to tell you
guys what my favorite things that I read
in the psychology space were in 2022 now
if you watch my last two years's videos
you know that for me a good book is
defined not necessarily by the eloquence
of the book or the popularity of it or
the relevance of it to this day and age
but by the impact that it had on me
personally so this is a highly
subjective list and when I talk about a
book that has a strong personal impact
what I mean by that is a book that
helped facilitate a perspective shift
for me in a significant way so a good
book to me is a book that kind of breaks
some thought pattern or inherent belief
that I didn't realize I was holding on
to and helps me perceive things in a new
way so some of these books are going to
be really popular books some of them are
going to be extremely weird and esoteric
as with everything take what works for
you and leave the rest and I am going to
go through these books partially in
chronological order partially in order
of how much I liked them it's a very
vague structure but we are going to
begin at the beginning of the year with
my favorite read of January 2022 so I
actually had to go rewatch my favorite
books of 2021 list because I could not
believe that I read this book in 2022
because it so quickly became a humongous
part of my life but the book I started
off last year reading was the book
radical honesty by Brad Blandon if
you've been around this channel for a
while you have probably heard me
reference the philosophy of radical
honesty quite a few times and this book
was where that all began for me now at
this point it's almost difficult for me
to talk about radical honesty because I
went so deep into the philosophy last
year and then came out the other side a
little bit and started to see its
limitations and the areas in which I
don't necessarily recommend it to
everyone for various reasons however it
would be dishonest of me to say anything
but this philosophy changed my life for
myself specifically learning to get
centered in my realtime momentto moment
experience of being alive and
communicate that is clearly and cleanly
as I can to other people in moments when
it really matters so when tensions are
running High when I'm feeling
overwhelmed by an experience of anger
resentment attraction fear vulnerability
has brought me so much further in my
personal development work than almost
anything else and that style of becoming
self-aware about our present moment
experience es separating that out from
the stories we tell ourselves about
those experiences and about other people
and learning to be present and direct is
what the philosophy of radical honesty
is all about now there's also a
community out there of people who
practice radical honesty I recommend the
community with many caveats which I may
go into at another point in time but
because I'm going to keep the focus of
this on books I do absolutely recommend
this one it is written by a man who was
a psychotherapist for many years and he
observed over the course of his practice
that the extent to which people got
better in their lives seemed to be
strongly correlated to how truthful they
began being in their day-to-day lives so
he wrote a book all about it that you
can check out if you would like to learn
more about this philosophy the author is
named Brad Blandon I think that there
are significant blind spots in this
philosophy mostly related to him not
particularly acknowledging the position
of privilege he is in which is
unfortunately often something that
personal development communities
struggle to incorporate if their
philosophy is one of self-
responsibility social responsibility can
go out the window a little bit and so I
encourage you if you pick up this book
and get into the practice you take
certain things with a grain of salt
however overall again I would be lying
if I told you anything other than the
philosophy of radical honesty has
changed my life and this book is
incredibly worth a read particularly if
you are on an attachment healing journey
of any sort to have an insecure
attachment style means by definition
that you are significantly distorting
the way that you think about attachment
relationships and the way that you
experience your own emotions and I'm not
going to say that this philosophy is
able to fix that however it can be a
really powerful tool on the route to
getting more honest with yourself and
other people so that's my first
recommendation of 2022 the next book I
struggled with whether or not to include
this because it is technically a
textbook that I read during my master's
degree but this model that is presented
in this book is at this point in time my
favorite psychological model that I have
ever come across and that is the dynamic
maturational model of attachment and a
book that outlines it well is the book
raising parents by Patricia Crittenden
so it was a textbook for me while I was
doing my attachment Theory and research
degree but if you happen to be a giant
nerd it also has incredible information
within it that I imagine most people who
are interested in attachment Theory
would take well to so to give some
background on this Theory first of all
there will be a day where I will publish
hundreds of videos about the dynamic
maturational model of attachment the
only reason I haven't done it so far is
because I love this model so much that I
feel almost a little bit gatekeeping
around it I want to make sure that if I
do make videos on this they are
absolutely perfect and do the system
True Justice particularly because
Patricia Crittenden who is the author of
this book is one of the most precise
speakers I have ever come across in my
life as well as an incredibly thorough
researcher and pretty much every
statement the woman makes seems to be
intellectually airtight so to explain it
well is taking on a very big job however
the dynamic maturational model of
attachment is in some respects an
expansion on the original theory of
attachment that John bulby and Mary
anworth and Mary main did significant
work on so Patricia Crittenden used to
do work with Mary answorth who is the
researcher who created the strange
situation procedure that was the first
clinical assessment of attachment Styles
and then they stopped working together
and then Patricia Crittenden went on to
use the attachment theory that most of
us in North America are used to hearing
as the only version of attachment Theory
to build an expanded theory of
attachment called the dynamic
maturational model the dynamic
maturational model of attachment is
different from the traditional model in
many ways one of which is that it looks
at how attachment changes and develops
over the course of our lives so it takes
into account which attachment responses
we are capable of having at which stages
of our development and why we adopt the
attachment strategies we do at different
phases of Our Lives based on the context
of Our Lives I'm going to not go too
much more into detail because I could
spend the next several hours explaining
this model to you however if your
interest is peaked this is a phenomenal
introduction to the model it is a little
bit dense it's written in a very
Academic Way however it's also pretty
accessible she uses stories and
anecdotes to highlight the points and
it's a great starting place if the
dynamic maturational model is one that
you are interested in familiarizing
yourself with next favorite book of 2022
is another very Hefty one coping with
trauma related dissociation by susette
Boon Kathy steel and ano vanderhart if
you're interested in the concept of
dissociation and its relationship to
trauma this is a really great book to
start out with in my opinion it's
lengthy but it's packed with really
great stuff it has exercises in it so if
you're looking to start working with
your own dissociative responses there is
ample opportunity to dive into that and
the thing I really liked about this book
was that the paradigm shift it kind of
gave me was the idea that you can have
phobias of your own internal experiences
now this is something that attachment
Theory actually looks at so we talk a
lot in the attachment Theory World about
which information we defensively exclude
from our awareness in order to keep
functioning in the early environments
that we're raised in and for some reason
that idea of systematically emitting
pieces of information from our awareness
from a young age always made sense to me
in theory but it didn't really click for
me until I read this book in this book
they talk about dissociation as a
natural response to encountering some
sort of either physiological state or
emotional response that we have a phobia
or a fear of and that kind of helped me
open my eyes to the idea of what it
means to have a psychological blind spot
so those things we learn to
systematically defensively excluded from
our awareness at a very young age become
these blind spots in adulthood where
whenever something comes up for us that
is intolerable to us psychologically we
might automatically begin to dissociate
from and the book covers so much it goes
into working with sleep disturbances
addiction anger shame and guilt triggers
it really covers the gamut of learning
to work in real time with the things
that trigger dissociative responses in
many people who have trauma experiences
and even though it's huge and Hefty you
can absolutely just use it to work with
the problems that you're experiencing so
if the chapter on sleep doesn't apply to
you don't read it skip it if the chapter
on shame or on anger doesn't resonate
with you then don't do it but it serves
as a really good overall guide to some
of the things that are likely to come up
if you have early trauma and struggle
with dissociation and it's just a very
accessible book like it explains things
in clear terms in layman's terms and it
makes the very dense kind of abstract
idea of what dissociation is feel very
personal and accessible so highly
recommend this one if that's a topic
that interests you next book I read on
Audible so I don't have a physical copy
of it to show you but the book stolen
focus by Johan Hari I read this book and
immediately Googled Johan Hari and was
devastated that he was not attracted to
my gender this man I believe almost more
so than anyone else I've read the work
of really has his finger on the pulse of
modern psychology so he is a journalist
who writes books on psychological topics
and stolen focus is all about the kind
of crisis of attention that exists in
the modern world so this book I believe
did come out in 2022 it actually is a
more modern contemporary book and it's
very relevant to the world that we live
in right now he goes over how social
media is designed to hijack our
attention spans and he provides a mix of
kind of strategies that we can use to
help ourselves focus in a world full of
distractions but also which larger scale
issues need to be addressed in order for
this kind of crisis of attention to get
resolved so he goes into what tech
companies are doing different policies
he believes might help rectify the
problem he really tackles it from every
different angle and if inattentiveness
in any capacity is something that you
struggle with I really recommend this
book it is a very enlightening very
refreshingly honest read and I just
cannot recommend Johan Harry as an
author enough he is also going to make a
reappearance on this list later on okay
the next book now we're getting into the
part of the list where I'm like this
list is very personal to me in the year
that I had in
2022 uh but I love this book and I
couldn't leave it out the book 33
Strategies of War by Robert Green now
I'm going to get on my soap box for a
moment about Robert Green Robert Green
has written a series of books that have
become incredibly popular in Psychology
48 Laws of Power seduction Mastery 33
strategies of war and I'm sure he's got
other ones either out there or in the
works and a common criticism of Robert
Green is people being like I think this
man is a psychopath and I think he's
just out there handing out strategies
for how to be a better psychopath and I
don't necessarily agree first of all I
don't know he might be a psychopath but
I wouldn't immediately classify him as
one however he uses his books to address
the kind of dark psychic underside of
human behavior so he puts words and very
accurate ones to the specific patterns
of manipulation of psychological warfare
and of all the ways in which people
consciously or unconsciously manipulate
and take advantage of each other he
basically uses the book to outline a
whole bunch of different strategies that
different leaders or different countries
have employed as war strategy and then
he Maps this on to human psychology and
how people use these types of strategies
to navigate psychological battles with
each other if you think that you have
never implemented such a strategy all
that means is that you have a giant
blind spot human nature is inherently
self-protective and anytime we pick up a
Robert Green Book what we are doing is
being present with what I believe is
currently in the shadow of the
collective unconscious right right now
everyone is fighting to be virtuous and
to be seen as the most good and the most
politically correct and the most pure
and the more we need to think of
ourselves that way the more we continue
to do our manipulative behaviors
unconsciously there's a famous Carl
Young quote that goes one does not
become enlightened by imagining figures
of the light but by making the darkness
conscious and I believe that we would
actually all be a lot better off in the
world right now if we would make
ourselves a little bit more aware of the
ways in which we subtly turn to
manipulative tactics whether that means
overtly coercing people to do what we
want or convincing ourselves that we
have completely pure intentions and have
never done anything wrong and then
writing off in our own minds everything
we do that is actually manipulative to
convince ourselves that we would never
do that everyone has these Tendencies
and the more we make ourselves aware of
them and put specific language at least
in our own mind to the Dark Side of our
own and other people's psychological
patterning the better people we
ultimately end up becoming and the
better we are able to protect ourselves
from other people's strategies which are
often operating for them unconsciously
as well so if you want to do a little
bit of work on your Shadow I recommend
the 33 strategies of war or any other
Robert Green Book and there's an
honorable mention that I want to throw
out here and it's going to seem very
freaking random in relation to the 33
Strategies of War but there is a CH in
the 33 strategies of war that talks
about the importance of recognizing your
own mortality so in the book Robert
Green suggests doing a death meditation
so the chapter is all about getting
comfortable with and keeping in your
conscious awareness the fact that you
are mortal and might die at any time and
that led me to go pick up another book
that I'd had on my shelf for a while and
finally crack it open and that book is
who dies by Steven and Andrea LaVine an
investigation of conscious living and
conscious dying and this book is all all
about bringing the awareness of our
mortality and the fact that we are going
to die into our experience of day-to-day
living the reason I did not give this
book its own slot in the list is because
I didn't finish it I got 2third of the
way through so I don't know what happens
in the last third maybe find out who
dies and I have a rule against
recommending books that I don't finish
however the reason I didn't finish this
one was because I got so much out of the
first 2/3 that I had to like put it down
and save the rest for later so I will
return to this book and I'm not above
giving it its own slot in the 2023 list
if it turns out that the final third
rocks my world this year but what I've
read of it is absolutely phenomenal and
I think particularly for anyone going
through any sort of crisis of meaning in
their life this is a really great
resource to turn to to get some
perspective to help you zoom out on your
life and just really connect to your own
Humanity it is very rare for a book to
be able to do that for us but this book
does a stunning job of it and I cannot
recommend it enough so it's sharing spot
number six on the list with the
psychopathic war strategies book because
I did not promise that this list would
make any sense spot number five is the
book The Comfort crisis by Michael
Easter I don't know if I just loved this
book because I read it at a time that
was perfect for me in my life I just
finished a dissertation I was burnt out
Beyond human comprehension and I was
hanging out in the mountains of Colorado
reading and hiking and relaxing and that
was my entire life at this point however
the Comfort crisis is a phenomenal book
that tackles why modern Society leaves
us with this kind of vacuum of meaning
in our lives and it goes over practical
ways of getting back in touch with our
senses and engaging with a greater sense
of Vitality in our day-to-day lives and
if you are looking for kind of a reboot
of a book this is a really great read to
turn to I think it's probably becoming
relevant and will become relevant later
on that I went through a fairly
significant depressive episode in 2022
which I made a video in the midst of
that I will link in the description of
this video because I love that video
it's one of my own personal favorites
but that's why a lot of this list has
the flare of experiencing a crisis of
meaning the Comfort crisis is really
great for that it's just at its core a
book about reconnecting to our own
humanity and cutting through all of the
noise of day-to-day living in modern
society and remembering who we are on an
instinctual emotional level and how to
live with more awareness of that in the
real world and he weaves it into this
cool story about his own foray Into the
Wilderness which just helps Drive the
points home in an interesting way book
four God I loved this book this is
definitely the randomst book I'm going
to recommend and there has to be at
least one every year but the book hot
and heavy by Judy Hollis finding your
soul through food and sex so Judy Hollis
if you have watched my previous videos
you will know has had an extraordinary
impact on my own journey and my own
foray into the field of attachment she
wrote a book sometime in the ' 80s I
believe called fat is a family affair
that was my first introduction to family
systems thinking and family systems
thinking revolutionized my understanding
of psychology as a whole so I was in
school taking a nutrition course when I
discovered Judy Hollis and I immediately
bought all of her books which you have
to like find secondhand online for the
most part because they're older and not
all still in print anymore and then a
couple of them I read and a couple of
them I went ooh I'm not ready for this
book yet but there will come a time
where I am and then I picked up hot and
heavy in 2022 and I was like the time
has come I'm ready for this book it all
about how women learn to disconnect from
a very young age of their embodied
experience of sexual attraction and they
instead learn to think of themselves as
objects to be acted upon rather than as
people who can step into the full range
of their sexual experience and the full
range of their wanting and their lust
both for people and for life and to give
you a spoiler of my 2023 list of books
at least half of them are going to be on
that topic alone the topic of women
learning to disconnect from their
authentic embodied wants and feelings
and attractions and how to start really
getting in that embodied space and
getting back to expressing ourselves
fully and authentically in a way that
many of us have not for many many
decades so is hot and heavy which
largely looks at the relationship
between food addiction and repressed
sexuality the top book the best book
that's been written about women
detaching from their sexualities
probably not but it is the first one I
read that made me really have a paradigm
shift and so it goes on the list and I
will forever think back fondly on this
book book number three many of you if
you are in the psychology space may have
already come across this but I read it
for the first time in 2022 the book no
bad parts by Richard Schwarz this book
is an introduction to internal family
systems therapy which is a super popular
therapeutic model at the moment and it
looks at how we kind of naturally
fragment our personalities as we go
through life and the more disintegrated
we become in the different parts of
ourselves the more we're going to start
experiencing mental health challenges
challenges coping or relating to people
and so internal family systems as a
theory helps us draw awareness to all of
those different parts that make up the
whole of us and this book in particular
offers a very compassionate Hands-On
guide to how we can start integrating
the different parts of ourselves that
might appear to be at odds so this is a
really nice book I recommend
specifically for anyone coping with
complex trauma responses or attachment
responses that seem very at odds
particularly fearful avoidant or
disorganized attachment it's a really
good model that offers some Hands-On
skills and some very practical
meditations and exercises that you can
use in the moment when you're struggling
with competing desires or competing
worldviews or whatever it is that feels
at odds within yourself I should also
note that it's the only book I've read
on internal family system so I can't
confidently say say it's the best
however I've talked to a bunch of people
who've read many books on the topic and
I have never heard anyone say they
dislike this one or that it isn't at the
least one of the best out there so
highly recommend this if you are looking
to get into or further explore the topic
of internal family systems book number
two that admittedly is appearing near
the end of the list mostly because I
read it at the end of December in 2022
so we're book ending radical honesty
with this book is the book men who hate
women and the women who love them by
Susan forward oh boy this book was the
beginning for me of a journey of coming
to recognize my own internalized
misogyny later this year I imagine it is
highly likely that I will be coming out
with quite a few videos on how to
recognize and work with internalized
misogyny but this book for me was a
really good jumping point a lot of 2022
for me was doing Shadow work was looking
at the ways in which when I am not
conscious and when I'm not aware of what
I'm doing when I get offended when I get
defensive when my ego is threatened I
will naturally start acting in ways that
I'm not proud of there's certain
defensive responses that come up and
some of those I started realizing in
2022 were the product of some very deep
internalized misogynistic thought
patterns that I had been carrying with
me for the majority of my life the book
men who hate women and the women who
love them was my first foray into making
those thought patterns more conscious
for myself self and this spot on the
list comes with an honorable mention the
book why does he do that by Lundy boft
phenomenal phenomenal book about
unconscious misogyny the only reason it
doesn't get the number two spot is
because technically I read half of it in
2022 half of it in 2023 so I wasn't sure
which list to include it on but both of
these books are really great places to
start if you want to start making
yourself aware of unconscious
misogynistic thought patterns that exist
both socially and in individual people
including in women it made a lot of
things very painfully explicit and clear
to me that I like to think I'm a much
better person for having finally looked
at as ridiculously uncomfortable as it
was and last but so far from least to
call this the best book I read in 2022
would truly not be doing it proper
Justice this is one of my favorite books
that I have ever read in my life the
book lost connections by Johan Hari I
read this book in the midst of I don't
know if I'm going to call it my deepest
ever depressive episode that's got firm
competition throughout the course of my
life but the first depressive episode I
ever experienced in my life where I kept
my eyes open during it and started
really looking at why I was there and
reading this book at that time felt like
a guide through the Wilderness I could
write a whole video doing nothing but
unpacking how much I love this book and
how crucial a read I think it is for
literally anybody who is alive right now
but in a nutshell what it goes over is
the crisis of depression that we are
facing in the modern era and Johan Hari
talks to experts from every different
related feel imaginable he presents and
examines various different paradigms
that we have for looking at depression
and he distills everything he learns
into these core principles that he
believes are driving this epidemic of
depression and then he talks about how
to tackle each of those things at the
root I truly cannot even begin to do
this book Justice in a single
description if you are someone who has
ever struggled with depression in any
small or large way I cannot recommend
picking this book up enough Johan har is
an incredible researcher and the way
that he presents what he learns is so
accessible so captivating and so
soothing as an added bonus the man is
just a gift I recommend picking up
anything that he has ever written but
this book in particular if you struggle
with depression or know someone who does
or are currently alive in this day and
age I just cannot imagine this not
applying to anybody and it was by far
without a shadow of a doubt the best
book that I personally read in 2022 all
right before I let you go because I am
myself I of course have to do a list of
honorable mentions as quickly as I can
honorable mention number one I wanted to
put this on the main list but I was like
I don't know I think it's a little bit
too out there to make it to the main
list um but I took pure unadulterated
Delight in the book busting loose from
the money game by Robert shine Feld in
2022 so I was doing this radical honesty
series online where we got together and
talked about money very transparently
once a week and I was telling one of my
friends about this series and he was
like oh I read this really weird book
one time about money that I want to
recommend to you but I have to let you
know it's very out there and I was like
hit me with it I love weird
recommendations and this was the book
that he told me about busting loose from
the money game I read it and was like
that book was absolutely batshit insane
and and I really loved it the reason why
I love this book was because it does one
of my favorite things which is taking a
really heavy really difficult topic for
a lot of people and treating it with a
lot of lightness so the premise of the
book is essentially there is no reality
and everything that we believe about
money is just made up inside of our own
head and if we decide to start believing
something else then we will have a
completely different experience of
reality and money do I believe that this
book is an accurate representation of
reality
no do I believe that this book is an
oddly soothing thing to read if you're
experiencing any challenge with finances
yeah could be at the least it's very
entertaining so if you're in the mood
for something weird I recommend the book
and just know that you're going to have
a strange time reading it next honorable
mention the book quit by Annie Duke this
one is a really good overview of the
fact that we just don't talk enough
about how being successful is largely a
product of knowing when to give up on
stuff so the author kind of makes the
point that we always hear about the
success stories of people who persisted
and persisted and persisted and that
happens for various reasons one it makes
a good inspiring story two if we're
interviewing someone about their success
we are by Nature interviewing them about
something they didn't give up on and
three it's just not as interesting to
hear about the things that people gave
up on most of the time however she makes
a really compelling case for not losing
sight of how important it can be to
notice when it's time to jump ship on
something and to make that decision at
the right time if you really struggle to
trust your gut when it comes to knowing
when it's time to go in any capacity
this is a great book to pick up next
honorable mention the book anxiety RX by
Russell Kennedy Russell Kennedy is an
incredible writer he's very engaging
he's very personable and he has played a
very prominent role in the
conceptualization of anxiety disorders
and in this book he goes over some
things that he thinks he didn't get
right about characterizing anxiety early
on in his career and what he now thinks
of it so in this book he presents a
fascinating Paradigm for looking at
anxiety through the lens of trauma and
early development and I strongly
recommend this book for anyone who
struggles with anxiety in any capacity
it is the sanest book I ever read on the
topic of anxiety in my life so lost
connections is the sanest book I've ever
read on depression anxiety RX is the
sanest book I've ever read on anxiety if
either of those things are things you
struggle with highly recommend those
books and the last honorable mention I'm
going to bring up today not because I
couldn't go on forever but just because
this video is getting very long is the
book A Woman's Worth by Maryann
Williamson if you're jonesing for some
more female empowerment after reading
hot and heavy this one is a very quick
read that is packed with a lot of wisdom
from a woman who is in my opinion one of
the most profound female philosophers of
our current time she presents very deep
information in a very accessible and in
many cases very light-hearted way you
could read this in an afternoon and if
it interests you I recommend you do okay
that's all I'm going to say for today on
the best books that I read in 2022 there
were many more of them but that was the
highlight reel let me know in the
comments section what books you read in
2022 that you really enjoyed I love the
idea of everybody sharing book
recommendations with each other so
please in the spirit of pretending it 6
months ago I would love it if you would
think back to the best book that you
read last year and drop it below also
because I am constantly looking for
recommendations so I would love to find
something in the comments that ends up
making it onto my best books of 2023
video all right as always I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I hope
that you are reading to your inner
children and I will see you all back
here again super soon
[Music]