hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're going
to be talking about resilience and today
I want to go over something that I see
getting mixed up left right and Center
Online which is the difference between
trauma and hardship hardship being a set
of circumstances that are really
challenging and that require a lot of
resilience for us to move through but
that ultimately we are able to make
sense of
whereas trauma refers to things that
happen to us that disrupt our ability to
make coherent connections between our
subjective inner world so our world of
feelings Sensations in the body emotions
thoughts and perceptions and the outer
world of people and places and things
and events and situations that are
external to us so when we are dealing
with trauma there is generally a very
confused relation ship between inner and
outer world because something has
happened that has disrupted our ability
to form memories in a way that is
adaptive for US versus when we are
dealing with hardship we're generally to
a reasonable degree at choice about how
we are going to connect our inner and
outer world so for example you can have
someone saying something like oh that
thing that happened to you that you're
claiming is traumatic also happened to
me and I'm fine I found a way to get
through through it to reframe my
thinking about it and to move on with my
life air go if you're traumatized by it
you're just being dramatic when in
reality what might be going on here is
that the same event caused trauma for
one person so to cause incoherence in
their system whereas for the other
person for a variety of possible reasons
that we're going to go into as this
video goes on that same event might have
gotten stored in their system as a
hardship so as a quick rule of thumb if
you are able to change your thinking
about something and reorganize the way
that you're holding something in your
mind in a way that allows you to
regulate around it and choose the next
steps that you take intentionally it's
likely that what you're dealing with is
a hardship so an example of this I had a
really challenging year this past year
of my life 2024 was just not it for me I
had a lot of things go wrong and after a
period of being very down and very sad I
was able to sit down with myself and go
you you know what I think it's time for
me to start looking at how to create a
new future for myself now that I've
mourned the future I thought I was going
to have and I was able to find ways to
regulate around the grief and the pain
and the loss that I was moving through
and choose a new way forward and when I
started employing those plans and moving
in that new Direction I was able to
coherently follow my own plans and
effectively change the way that I was
feeling because what what I was doing
was regulating around a hardship and
this does not mean that the challenging
circumstances of our lives are not
genuinely really really difficult to
overcome sometimes but when we are
dealing with trauma trauma is a lot
harder to resolve and the reason for
that is because our conscious minds and
what we think is safe and accurate and
true about the world is not agreeing
with some part of how our body is
processing the environment because
trauma inherently disrupts our ability
to make sense of our experiences and in
a lot of cases to move forward in a
linear way with the plans that we make
both trauma and hardship require a lot
of coping skills but they are not the
same coping skills so what might work to
resolve trauma is not going to work to
resolve a hardship and what works to
resolve a hardship is often not what
works to resolve trauma so it's
important to figure out what we're
dealing with so that we can get to where
we want to go next with the best chance
of success going through a hardship is
kind of like reading a really
challenging chapter in a book where the
characters might be disillusioned or
distressed or going through something
really difficult but there is a coherent
narrative online as the reader you can
understand what is happening and you
understand why the characters are
feeling the way that they're feeling or
acting in the way that they're acting so
if somebody handed you that chapter of
the book and said can you write the next
next chapter you would have enough
information to be able to write a next
chapter that made sense and followed the
rules of logic versus having trauma is
like being handed a chapter of the book
that is missing pages or where certain
sentences are glued upside down and
other ones are just smudged out entirely
it's really challenging to make sense of
what's Happening inside the chapter so
it's really hard to write the next one
because you don't have the coherent
information you need ordered in the way
that you need it in order to make sense
of what is going on and this is very
much what it's like to have trauma
stored inside the body when we go
through traumatic events what generally
happens is either our stress levels
become abnormally elevated which causes
us to store too much memory in our body
related to the trauma and we'll talk
about what that means in a minute or we
go into a shutdown response in which we
might not be able to form proper
memories that include all of the
relevant details we need to stay safe in
similar situations in the future the way
that we form memories as human beings is
highly related to our emotions so our
emotions alert us to what feels
important so if I wake up and look at my
watch and realize I slept through my
alarm and I have a really important
business meeting to get to 15 minutes
from now my body is probably going to
have a stress response and I'm going to
get pummeled with things like adrenaline
and cortisol that are meant to get me
out of bed and to meet the demands of my
environment now when I get to that
meeting that stress response knows it's
time to calm down because I have clean
subject object relationships online I
can recognize I needed that stress to
get to this meeting and now that I'm
here it's time for my body to be safe
and relaxed at least to whatever level
is normal for me inside of a business
meeting but one of the things that can
happen that leads to trauma is when our
system becomes flooded with those stress
chemicals in a situation where we were
not expecting that to happen and so we
do not have the understanding online to
make sense of it so if for example I'm
walking down the street one day and I
get attacked out of absolutely nowhere
what's going to happen is the stress
chemicals in my body shoot through the
roof because all of a sudden I have to
respond to a demand that I did not see
coming that is very threatening and so
what my body is desperately going to be
trying to do is understand what it is
that led to that attack and it's not
going to be doing this consciously this
is what my body is going to be trying to
log so my body might be tracking what's
happening as I'm getting pummeled to the
ground and it might notice it sees
someone walking by wearing pink shoes
and it sees an oak tree in the distance
and it smells the scent of Sandalwood
cologne that my attacker is wearing and
all of these things are getting logged
in my system as memories that the body
holds on to because what gets stored in
the body as memory is highly related to
the strength of our emotional
responses this is why you tend not to
forget things like the first time your
child smiled at you but you do tend to
forget things like where you put your
keys when you came home from work
yesterday one of those things had huge
body emotional responses come online
when it happened and the other one
probably did not and so we remember
things that are tied to the strong
emotional reactions we've had when we
are surprised and in danger at the same
time generally our body goes into a
super intense stress response we have
adrenaline and cortisol coursing through
our system trying to get us to rise to
the occasion of fighting off whatever
threat is in our environment this is not
the only possible way our bodies can
respond but it's one that has a high
likelihood of leading to trauma and so
if I was not expec that attack but all
of a sudden my stress response is
through the roof my brain and my body
are frantically going to be trying to
encode any information possible about
what may have led to this attack and so
now in the future let's say I go to the
hospital I recover from this attack and
it's weeks later and I'm trying to make
sense of what happened and maybe I don't
have a good coherent explanation for why
I got attacked on a street that I
thought was safe in the middle of the
day maybe it was just astronomically
unlikely that this would ever have
happened and so even if I can make sense
internally of the fact that this was a
random attack that I could not possibly
have predicted my body is still going to
be trying to keep me safe with whatever
means it can come up with so what
happens is I may have internalized a
bunch of
triggers which means the next time I'm
walking down the street and I see
someone with pink shoes even if I have
no conscious memory of the fact that one
of the last things I saw before passing
out when I was getting attacked was a
pair of pink shoes I might instantly go
into a massive fight or flight state in
my body the second I see those pink
shoes because some part of my body has
loged that this stimuli was present
during a time when I was having an
abnormally high stress response and so
this kind of thing tends to be what
we're talking about when we're talking
about trauma it's not just that we went
through something
difficult it's that our body stored
something as relevant data that may not
have been relevant data so a different
example of this of something like this
happening that might lead to hardship
rather than trauma is let's say you know
that you are walking through a really
dangerous neighborhood at night and so
your body is already kind of primed for
something to happen and then you notice
out of the corner of your eye a little
flicker of movement and then you get
jumped on and it's not that this
couldn't cause trauma but it is possible
that if you were already a little bit
prepped for the danger and your
conscious mind already knew it's
possible that something dangerous is
going to happen here you might have an
incredibly hard time emotionally
regulating around the fact that that
happened once it's over you might have
to do a lot of processing of it with
your friends and loved ones but your
body might not be storing triggers the
same way because your system may already
have been a little bit prepped for that
attack so the spike in your stress
response was not as great it was not as
unexpected and it was not as confusing
to your system airgo your body is not
necessarily going to be left desperately
searching for reasons why you are
attacked it's going to have
situationally appropriate danger cues
online maybe you're going to feel
fearful the next time you walk through
that neighborhood as you should because
your body is logging real danger cues as
opposed to your body responding to
something like a pink pair of shoes or
an oak tree in the distance because once
your stress response spiked so fast in a
scenario that your conscious mind could
not make sense of that your body just
started logging everything it could
possibly think of as potentially related
to that attack now when we're dealing
with something like this this is where
trauma therapy is incredibly helpful and
framing something as a hard situation is
not because even though it was a hard
situation and the goal of trauma therapy
might eventually be to integrate what
happened and to get through enough of
those trigger responses that you're able
to make sense of it hence transforming
it into a hardship in your mind it's not
going to work if you're trying to get
over this thing that is a trauma that
you now have triggers around by just
thinking more positively about it your
body is still going to be responding to
those triggers every time they come
online no matter what you tell yourself
in your conscious mind so trauma is not
just about what happens to us it's about
how our minds and bodies can or cannot
make sense of what happened to us and
which inaccurate subject object
connections might get left over in our
nervous system because our bodies were
storing inaccurate information about
what led to the extreme shift in our
body State now this is not the only way
we can experience trauma another thing
that can happen in traumatic experiences
that overwhelm us is our bodies and
Minds can go into a shutdown response
and when our systems are shutting down
in the most extreme forms of
dissociation we are actually not able to
form memories properly so dissociation
is another word that gets used to mean a
wide variety of things these days and on
one end of the spectrum we have it being
used to describe kind of zoning out and
being somewhere else mentally than where
you are physic physically but there's
another end of the spectrum where
essentially we are unable to form
memories properly because our bodies are
in a state of emotional shutdown so
sometimes when you have a really
traumatic event if the body is in a
shutdown dissociated response while it's
happening you might have people either
lose memories related to the event or
not be able to remember very much or
very much detail or not be able to make
a lot of conscious Recollections about
what their environment was like while
this thing was happening or what it felt
like to be them while this thing was
happening when we are dissociated in
this way essentially our inner world is
not making proper connections between
what's going on for us internally and
what's going on for us externally so
this might lead to a situation where for
example someone is being brutally
attacked or abused but they're unable to
log and integrate into memory the pain
response of what was happening to them
in their body and so when we have this
type of trauma often what happens is
that where we should in the future
perceive danger we do not perceive it
and so we might walk over and over again
directly back into the same situations
that caused danger to us in the past
because our body is shut down in the
moments where the appropriate response
would be to feel distress so an example
of this might be someone who grew up in
a rough neighborhood and who is
repeatedly subjected to attacks but who
as an adult does not avoid dangerous
scenarios and frequently puts themselves
In Harm's Way because the only way that
their body knew how to deal with that
prevalence of danger was to dissociate
from it on some level and so now in
places where that normal healthy stress
response the same one that gets us to
the meetings that we need to get to in
time and that gives us that gut feeling
that something is off when we're walking
down a dark desert at Alleyway at night
and hear footsteps approaching behind us
that stress response that should be
coming online might not be coming online
for people who have trauma that caused
them to dissociate during the original
traumatic event and therefore not
develop enough memory about which
details led to that event and if this is
something you want to learn more about I
cannot recommend enough the book trauma
and memory by Peter LaVine who is world
renowned for his work in the field of
sematic therapy so really understanding
how our body is recovering from and
processing traumatic events and then
working with the trauma that lives in
our body until we are able once again to
make those connections between our
subjective inner world and the objective
outer World properly but the main reason
I wanted to go over that and exactly
what it means to have trauma that lives
in the body is because life is
challenging in many ways and not all of
our challenges are trauma but if we are
are looking at something that has been
traumatic for us and we are expecting
ourselves to just get over it the way we
would get over a hardship we're going to
be setting ourselves up for failure and
on the flip side of things once again if
we are treating something as trauma when
what it is is in fact a hardship that we
need to find ways to reframe and
regulate around trauma therapy is
probably not going to be that helpful to
us so 2024 for me personally was a
terrible year I had just a series of
very unfortunate events happen in very
quick succession to me and it just
totally knocked the life out of me for a
while and for about 6 months I felt
really down really sad really unwilling
and uninterested in engaging with my
life because I was in a state of
mourning and there was a point in the
process where I started looking back at
everything that had happened that year
and asking myself are any of those
things that happened to me likely to
cause lingering effects
traumatic and the question I had to ask
myself to get that question answered was
do I think that these events cause
disruptions in my ability to understand
the relationship between my subjective
inner world of feelings and Sensations
and the outer world of people places and
things outside of my body and I kind of
went you know what yeah there was at
least one thing that I notice I now have
a freeze response around in a scenario
that it doesn't necessarily makes sense
to be frozen about and so in that one
area I went and did a little bit of
exposure therapy and after I was able to
do that about three or four times my
body calmed down in relation to the
stimulus and then everything I was left
with was hardship it was up to me and my
conscious mind and my own body and
self-regulation skills to look back on
the year that it happened and to go how
am I going to make something good come
out of this even though it was so
bad how am I going to give myself the
space that I need to grieve and to let
go of my old ideals so that I can move
forward in a new way and I was able to
eventually get there because I had the
skills that I needed for coping with
hardship which are often skills like
consciously recognizing how much time
and space we need to do things like
grieve and process our losses I was able
to get clear on the amount of social
support that I was going to need to get
through that period and then I was also
able to recognize when I was at the
point where grieving was no longer going
to be the thing that was giving me the
most returns and where in fact my body
was now asking me to kind of get back at
it put myself back out there again set
new goals Chase New Opportunities and
start writing the next chapter of my
life this is what we are resourced
enough to do when we are dealing with
hardship it doesn't mean it's easy to
move through any of that but what it
means is that because we have a clear
understanding of how our inner world is
connected to our outer world we are able
to come up with solutions that actually
work for writing the next chapter of Our
Lives now if what I had been dealing
with as at other points in my life I had
was in fact a series of triggers in
which the way that my body was
responding to my environment was quite
different than the way that I was
thinking about or making sense of my
environment if that's what I'd been
dealing with trauma therapy would likely
have been a lot more helpful for me in
moving forward because I would have
first needed to find a way to make sense
of my world by clarifying the
relationship between my subjective inner
world and the object of outer world of
people places and things before I would
be able to start moving forward in a way
that makes sense so when we're looking
at healing trauma what we're often
looking at is working with therapists or
somatic practitioners and doing
treatments either like EMDR or exposure
therapies or other sematic forms of work
that help our body recognize when it's
in a safe scenario from when it's in
danger so that our minds and our bodies
end up getting back on the same page and
when we can get our minds and our bodies
back on the same page then we are gifted
with the opportunity to begin handling
our lives like hardships when difficult
things arise I remember when I was doing
my ma master's degree and I was learning
to assess the probability based on an
interview that I was reading that the
person who was being interviewed had
lingering trauma about something what we
were trained to look for among other
things was when this person was
discussing this thing that had happened
to them so some form of for example
adverse Early Child
experience when they were describing it
did they give details about who was
around to help them make sense of the
trauma so we were trained to report
adverse experiences as more likely to
have been traumatic if the person
reported having no sense of protection
from or comfort about the adverse
experience from their caregivers or
anyone in their environment after it
happened and we were trained to code
something as less likely to have been
registered as traumatic which doesn't
mean definitely not just that it's less
likely if that person talks at length
about the support that they received
after the fact and the adults who came
in and helped them make sense of that
experience understand why it had
happened to them even if it was a
terrible thing that should never have
happened on a pure cause and effect
level what the danger cues were that led
to that that they can now look out for
in the future as well as comforted them
around the emotional pain that they were
experiencing that Comfort is often the
signal to the body that the trauma has
ended and that we are now in a safe
envir environment around safe people who
are going to protect us this is the
natural completion of the body's stress
response cycle where that stress
response spikes we deal with the
scenario and then afterward the body can
downregulate knowing that it's now safe
again when trauma gets stored in the
body essentially what's happening is
that that stress cycle does not get the
chance to complete and so it's unclear
to the person experiencing the trauma
whether or not it is over
and so a lot of trauma therapy is also
about learning in the presence of a
competent other who is trauma-informed
how to complete that stress response
cycle when those triggers arise for us
rather than just perpetually react to
them or in a lot of cases use some form
of substance to downregulate from them
because to be trapped in that stress
response cycle is
unbelievably taxing on the body and this
is a major reason why we find that
substance abuse often goes hand in hand
with having unresolved trauma what I
really want to drive home here is the
idea that hardship or challenging
situations are not the same as being
trapped in a trauma trigger hardship is
what happens when we have a challenging
set of experiences that we are able to
learn lessons from which we apply to our
future growth trauma is what keeps the
body stuck in a state where it cannot
learn because it's not making proper
subject object relations and when we
cannot learn it's really hard to plan
the next chapter of Our Lives
effectively because we don't know which
information is relevant that we ought to
focus on and what is not either because
our body is in some scenarios responding
with too much emotion relative to the
amount of danger that we're in or with
not enough emotion relative to the
amount of danger we're in and then you
can have complex forms of trauma where
you have triggers going off in different
dire directions at different things and
it overall leaves you with a very strong
sense of internal
disorientation and this needs to get
dealt with very differently than someone
who is experiencing adverse conditions
that they know how to make sense of even
if it's a bit challenging to figure out
exactly how to do that and so the goal
of trauma work at the end of the day is
to turn the challenging periods of Our
Lives into hardship rather than trauma
because through hardship we learn we
extract morals because our emotional
responses are happening at the right
level to match the adverse conditions of
our
environments hardship is what makes us
stronger trauma disrupts our ability to
form strength and so we need to get that
trauma dealt with and worked through
before we're able to learn from and
overcome our experiences in a way that
is going to actually help us grow this
is not meant to be discouraging and to
say that if you have trauma you're
completely out of luck quite the
opposite it's about giving ourselves the
grace to recognize when we're having one
of those responses so that we can give
our bodies what they need to process
them properly and then turn that into a
hardship that gets learned
from all right that's all I'm going to
say for today on this topic as always
let me know any thoughts questions you
have popping up as you go through this
video I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]