hey guys heidi prep here i was getting
really mad about like perfectly
centering myself in this video like it
takes so long for me to get directly in
front of the fireplace and then i know
i'm still not in the right place
whatever today we are doing another
installment of the attachment style
series so i'm going to be talking about
anxious avoidant and fearful avoidance
styles we're not going to spend as much
time on secure because they probably
don't need this video as much as the
other styles do but we're going to be
talking about a topic that all of the
insecure styles really need some help
with kind of inherently because the way
that they developed a relationship
around this thing was not ideal to say
the least and that thing is boundaries
so when we talk about boundaries there
are about a million different
definitions we could go with right i
think that boundaries mean something
slightly different to each person but
they definitely mean something different
to each attachment style and so today
we're going to do a little bit of
unpacking when it comes to how each
style looks at boundaries what comes to
mind when they think of the word
boundaries and why they have trouble
setting them because there is one thing
that all three insecure styles have in
common when it comes to boundaries in
that unless they have consciously worked
on it they all have a somewhat unhealthy
or underdeveloped relationship to
boundary setting quick sidebar by the
way i realized the other day that i
never really talk in these videos about
where my information comes from or what
level of education i have in this field
so a lot of what i talk about with
attachment styles is just stuff that i
have been reading and consuming on my
own time i'm currently writing a book
that has a portion to it that involves
attachment style so i've been doing a
lot of research in the area and i've
been working on interviewing experts in
the field but i'm also a student of
attachment theory so i'm currently doing
my master's degree in attachment theory
and research i am not the expert on this
there are wonderful experts out there
like gabor mate dan siegel the og
attachment researchers john bolby and
mary ainsworth and those are the sources
that you should be turning to if you
want to learn more about this field but
that's just a little bit of background
on my involvement in this field and my
knowledge base is only going to continue
to grow so a lot of these videos are
just me talking out what i'm learning as
i go and the information will absolutely
change and evolve as i continue to learn
more and that's a great thing it should
always be like that and thank you guys
for just being a part of that learning
process with me so okay boundaries so
i'm going to start with the anxiously
attached style i've noticed that anxious
types seem to have the most conscious
challenge with boundaries and what i
mean by that is that they have the most
awareness of the three and securely
attached styles of the fact that they
need to be setting better boundaries but
then they really really struggle with
putting those boundaries in place and
then enforcing them and this actually
makes total and complete sense because
the anxiously attached style
never learned proper self-regulation so
self-regulation is when we're able to
calm ourselves down when we're upset
whether that means soothing our own
anxieties validating our own emotional
experiences or problem solving on our
own these are all really important tools
that the anxiously attached person did
not have properly modeled for them early
on in life so they never really learned
how to do those things without someone
else's help so as an adult when the
anxiously attached person feels an
overwhelming emotion they often feel
kind of like they're on fire and they
need someone to help them feel
differently and for some anxiously
attached people this only applies to
certain emotions so maybe they really
struggle with anger and anxiety but
sadness they feel okay with going off
and self-soothing other anxiously
attached people might feel like they can
only feel happy in the presence of other
people or in the presence of a partner
so this could be somewhat selective to
some emotions but generally when it
comes to really strong really
overpowering emotions anxiously attached
people tend to experience difficulty
with self-regulation now what they do
know how to do is co-regulation now the
anxiously attached style does have a
very strong very visceral awareness of
their emotions and that's actually a
really good thing when we get to the
other styles you'll see that having low
emotional awareness can actually also
really really kick you in the butt but
when those strong emotions come up what
they really really feel like they need
unconsciously is mirroring so they need
to see their emotions expressed back to
them by someone else and if that someone
else whether it's their parent early on
in life or their partner later in life
is unable to kind of meet them where
they're at emotionally show that they
understand their feeling and then help
them kind of work through it calm down
whatever it is they will continue to
feel more and more distressed and often
make more and more bids to get their
emotions seen by their partner so maybe
they approach their partner one time and
try to explain their feeling and then
their partner doesn't respond to it
because maybe they're dating someone
who's avoidant who has lower than
average emotional awareness and so they
keep kind of turning the volume up in
different ways if they're not satisfied
by a conversation maybe they start
feeling agitated and then they start
picking a fight just to get that
negative emotion mirrored back to them
in whatever way they can and again this
is largely unconscious now what does
this have to do with boundaries well it
gives the anxiously attached person a
specific problem when it comes to
setting boundaries which is that
boundaries are the things that we put
around ourselves okay they're the
healthy emotional barriers that we put
up so that we can self-regulate behind
them but the problem is that the
anxiously attached person struggles with
self-regulation so if they have
boundaries up all of a sudden they don't
know how to handle their own emotions so
the anxiously attached person has a
tendency to set boundaries and then
become emotionally disregulated and
immediately knock all of their own
boundaries down because what they need
which is regulation is on the other side
of their boundary so there can be this
kind of constant tug of war happening
inside of the anxiously attached person
where they know they need to set
boundaries because maybe someone's not
treating them fairly maybe there is true
injustice in their relationship but they
feel like they need that person in order
to keep themselves emotionally okay and
sometimes the kind of workaround that
they try to do is saying they're setting
a boundary when what they're really
setting is an expectation so i've heard
a lot of anxiously attached people in
attachment groups that i frequent in
attachment webinars or seminars whatever
talk about how they set this boundary
that their partner always has to say i
love you before they go to sleep not
realizing that that is not a boundary
that is an expectation okay so if it's
something that someone else has to do
that is an expectation a boundary is
about something that you do
okay if all of your boundaries are
expectations you will perpetually be
disappointed because there is no way to
enforce an expectation other than
through controlling behaviors and
controlling behaviors are really not a
good set up for a healthy relationship
so again if your boundary is something
that someone else has to do for it to
stay in place that is not a boundary a
boundary is something that you will do
so let's give an example here let's say
you don't like the way that your partner
is speaking to you you don't like
certain words that they use that are
demeaning or insulting an expectation
would be you have to stop speaking to me
like that right that puts all of it in
your partner's hands a boundary would be
if you speak to me using that type of
language i will discontinue the
conversation and walk away until we can
return to the conversation in a calmer
state of mind
now of course this is going to feel very
very scary and difficult as an anxiously
attached person because
in that state you're probably very
dysregulated you need to feel your
partner's love or it feels like you need
to feel your partner's love in order to
be okay again so it's going to be really
hard to set that boundary and walk away
until you learn to do some self-soothing
so no anxiously attached person wants to
hear this but the solution to your
boundary setting problem actually does
not lie with you learning to set better
boundaries with other people it lies
with you learning to set better
boundaries with yourself okay once you
can tell yourself things like i will
leave every single situation that i'm in
in which i'm being disrespected or
spoken to unfairly once you can tell
yourself i will show up for myself pay
attention to my emotional experience and
learn how to soothe myself without the
help of my partner or my parent or
whoever it is who i need to put that
boundary between until you can learn to
make yourself okay within your own
boundaries it's going to be really
really hard to enforce them and so
that's where you need to start if you're
anxiously attached start with setting
better boundaries with yourself so
learning what the feeling in your body
is of having a boundary violated and
then learning some self-soothing
strategies to calm yourself down
now self-soothing is tricky for
anxiously attached people why because
you have that negative view of self so
when you're alone with yourself all of a
sudden you're flooded with these
feelings of self-hatred self-doubt
self-disgust and the first step is
learning how to change those feelings so
if you can't do this for yourself yet i
really recommend doing some inner child
work so when you do inner child work you
almost disembody yourself a little bit
so that you see yourself as a child who
you don't have that inherent sense of
hatred towards and you think about what
that child needs and this is something
that i really recommend doing with
either the help of a therapist or a
support group
i recently discovered the support group
adult children of alcoholics which deals
not just with people who grew up in
alcoholic homes but people who grew up
in homes where there was any sort of
family dysfunction and they approach
inner parenting and inner child work in
a really cool and robust way and the
groups are completely free so that's a
resource that you could check out but it
can be really really helpful to start
working on that relationship with
yourself developing that self compassion
so that when you're in those heated
moments you know that you can maintain
your own boundaries because you can take
care of yourself without knocking them
down and that's going to be the number
one thing that anxiously attached people
have to work on when it comes to setting
boundaries is learning how to be okay
within the boundaries they have set now
avoidance the kings and queens of
thinking that they have great boundaries
when what they are actually doing is
avoiding people like the plague so i am
fearful avoidant who leans strongly
dismissive avoidant and for my whole
life i thought that i was like a pillar
of boundary setting i thought i have
great boundaries i'm really good at
attending to my own needs it doesn't
bother me if i let someone down i'm okay
with other people being upset at me or
not liking me people can think whatever
they want to think i'm fine over here
and so there's no real reason to
communicate my needs wants feelings or
experiences to other people if i need
some time to be alone and self-regulate
i'll just take it and if that upsets
other people then they should learn how
to deal with their own emotions and
that's kind of the dismissive avoidant
mindset so again dismissive avoidance
function under the pretense i am okay
you are not okay so they believe that it
is their job to take care of themselves
and it is everyone else's job to take
care of themselves and if other people
can't take care of themselves that's not
their problem and just like the anxious
style has a very strong visceral
awareness of their emotions the
avoidance style has a very strong and
persistent awareness of how to keep
themselves okay and self-regulated okay
so both of these types are pretty good
at one thing and completely lack
awareness of the other thing and when it
comes to avoidant types what they lack
awareness about is the fact that they
need to communicate their boundaries or
else they are not boundaries they are
just glorified ghosting protocols now
the dismissive avoidant unlike the
anxious style is not naturally great at
recognizing what they're feeling and
what their needs are so when what they
need is to set a boundary what they
often experience emotionally is simply a
feeling of extreme overwhelm or maybe
even judgment towards another person
like this person really really needs to
take care of their own emotions because
they're putting a lot of them on me
and all of those emotions that overwhelm
that distress that judgment of others is
actually your brain as a dismissive
avoidant trying to alert you to the need
to set a boundary and what you will
naturally want to do is just slank away
unnoticed right you want to just kind of
check out leave the other person to deal
with their emotions which you may have
rightfully identified don't have that
much to do with you and then you want to
retreat to take care of your own
emotions now the end part of this
process is good the middle part is a
mess okay the middle part is the part
where you can communicate to someone
else this is what's going wrong this is
what i'm uncomfortable with this is
what's not okay to me
and this is what i need to be different
in order for me to re-engage with this
situation
and then you are free to go and
self-soothe okay that's what setting a
boundary is and the reason this is
important is because if you do not set
boundaries you end up in the same
situation with increasing intensity
over and over and over again and if you
are a da you probably often do so if
someone tries to get your attention one
time and you kind of ghost back away
ignore hope they deal with it chances
are they're going to try again later
with increasing intensity because you
never told them what your boundaries
were and doing so is hard work because
for you to know what and where your
boundaries are you have to be aware of
what emotions are coming up and that's
something that you have never really
learned to do so there will absolutely
be work that you need to do in this area
just like the anxious style needs to
work on self-soothing you need to work
on sensitizing yourself to your
emotional experience so that when you're
feeling overwhelmed when you're feeling
stressed out when you're feeling
incapable of dealing with a situation
because it's so emotionally loaded you
can speak up for yourself in the moment
and explain your discomfort in a way
that actually helps resolve the
situation rather than just kicking the
can down the road by backing out of it
and hoping it takes care of itself and i
feel annoyed and overwhelmed is like
layer one of your emotional experience
right
layer two of your emotional experience
is probably
i feel incapable of dealing with this
level of emotionality and that makes me
feel uncomfortable inadequate scared
maybe and maybe there's a need behind
that maybe what you need is some time
and space to think about what's
happening and to decide what you want to
do and that's a need that you can
communicate maybe what you need is for
someone to actually ask some questions
about what's going on in your head and
to help you work through it and figure
it out whether that's the person
standing in front of you or a friend who
you can contact once you've taken that
space that you need but in order for you
to start setting boundaries that
actually work and solve the problem one
time instead of returning to it over and
over and over you have to be willing to
show up
recognize your own internal experience
and communicate it clearly to the other
person or people involved and a really
good tool for learning to do this is
non-violent communication so non-violent
communication you can pick up a book on
you can go to there's like a million
training seminars on it and what
non-violent communication is is a system
that helps you identify what's going on
when you're in conflict and how to
phrase it effectively so it encourages
you to go one step deeper than the
feelings of annoyance or overwhelm and
frustration and really pinpoint what's
underneath those feelings what need is
being unmet and how can you communicate
that need in a way that the other person
will actually respond effectively to
because telling someone that their
emotion is invalid or crazy or an
overreaction even if those things are
true and i'm gonna give you some credit
they might be is not going to get you
the response you want okay using a tool
like non-violent communication that can
help you understand and then phrase what
your wants and needs are is going to go
a much much longer way than just telling
yourself that the entire conflict
doesn't make any sense so you should
just bow out now of course there are
situations where this works but there
are lots of situations where it doesn't
work especially any situation where
you're going to have repeated contact
with someone whether that's a parent a
partner a colleague a boss if you have
repeated interactions with someone all
of the unresolved interactions that you
slunk away from are gonna constantly
come back up in some form unless and
until you learn to communicate around
them so your pathway to setting
boundaries as a dismissive avoidant is
actually the opposite of the anxious
pathway the anxious pathway involves
learning to retreat and self-soothe the
avoidant pathway lies in showing up and
learning to give your needs a voice
every time i film an attachment video i
get through
anxious and then avoidant and then when
it's fearful avoiding time i need to go
take a giant coffee and chug it
before i can start talking because it is
such a big one every single time and
also just takes a long time to film
these videos but um
give me a moment here i'm having my
fearful avoidant coffee and then we will
chat about what you guys do
let's talk about the fearful avoidant so
fearful avoidance has a really
interesting relationship to boundaries
which all the types do but fearful
avoidant in particular has the awareness
of boundaries so deeply buried in their
psyche it is almost absurd so what that
means is that from a very young age
fearful avoidance tended to learn that
in relationships you are not supposed to
have any boundaries you're not supposed
to have any of your own needs any of
your own feelings you can only have
those things if you deal with them on
your own
now what that means is that when a
fearful avoidant gets into a
relationship they believe it's time for
me to have no boundaries okay so they
have this kind of discrepancy where when
they are in avoidance mode so often when
they're on their own when they're out of
relationship they think now i can do
whatever i want i can tend to my own
needs i can do my own thing i can avoid
the people in situations that i don't
want to get involved in but when i'm in
a relationship i should and the anxious
style shares this belief i should have
no boundaries between me and the other
person and i should give them whatever
they want from me whenever they want it
from me so that i can get love in return
now where this differs from the anxious
style is that the anxious style is going
down that highway kind of full force
okay so they believe the only way to get
my needs met is to have them met by
another person so i have to full force
pursue this other person and panic if
it's not working out the fearful
avoidant driving down the same highway
the other person needs to fulfill my
needs highway but they have one eye on
every single exit sign along the way
because they believe if i take one of
those exits it will lead me directly to
a place where i can go into avoidance
mode and meet my own needs so what you
get when you're in a relationship as a
fearful avoidant is this feeling that
you must have no boundaries you must
constantly attend to your partner
however if you are to leave the
relationship then you get to meet your
own needs then you get to self-sued then
you get to do whatever you want so
fearful avoidance often have chronic
fantasies about leaving their
relationship now this is different than
the anxious style who might have
fantasies about causing a big blow up
where they threaten to leave their
partner and then their partner chases
after them and they go wait wait come
back i love you right
the fearful avoidant has fantasies where
they actually leave the relationship
never see their partner again and live
happily on their own or with someone
else or whatever and after a while the
fearful avoidant begins to really truly
believe these fantasies and think i
would be better off if i were on my own
because in my fantasies i am so happy i
am not attending to another person's
needs i am not in conflict all the time
i'm living in a fun independent
interesting way and then they start to
blame the relationship for the things
that they can't have so instead of
trying to cultivate more freedom or more
excitement or more joy within their
relationship they just go oh this person
is the reason why i can't have those
things instead of talking to their
partner about what some of their unmet
needs are they inherently figure you
can't do that you can't express your own
needs so you have to accept whatever is
happening in the relationship and then
you can just fantasize about how good
it's going to be once you're gone and in
many ways this is a self-fulfilling
prophecy okay so a lot of fearful
avoidance because they so deeply believe
because they often came from very
enmeshed families where their needs were
completely intertwined with someone
else's needs and they weren't allowed to
have boundaries they believe it is bad
for me to have boundaries i'm a bad
person if i try to set them therefore
they let everything go as soon as
they're in a relationship like when
they're alone maybe they're really hard
workers or they're really disciplined
with their diet and exercise routine or
they are really good at self-care but
then as soon as they get into a
relationship they might let those things
go and allow this kind of
self-fulfilling prophecy to take place
where they believe that relationships
make you worse off weaker less
productive whatever it is and then that
fuels their fantasy life where they're
gone and they can do all of those things
again so if you are fearful avoidant and
this is a pattern that you recognize
yourself falling into you have to do the
work of proving yourself wrong so if you
are in a relationship you have to do the
same work that the avoidant style has to
do of showing up and stating your
boundaries and stating your needs and
talking about what isn't going right for
you and where you can pull that
awareness from
is your fantasies so in these fantasies
where you have left the relationship
what are you doing what is different
what are you feeling
those fantasies are giving you a window
into your unmet needs and if you can
find a way to bring those needs into the
relationship and find a way to satisfy
them without leaving your entire
worldview around relationships is gonna
start shifting so i used to always tell
myself that if i'm out of a relationship
i can be really disciplined with my
health and my career but as soon as i'm
in a relationship my partner whoever
that partner is and it happened in
multiple relationships will derail all
of those things so what happened as soon
as i got into any relationship
completely unconsciously i would start
avoiding conflict of any sort by
adapting myself to my partner's needs my
own needs would go out the window and
then one day i would look at my partner
and go oh my god you're the reason why i
have gained 10 pounds or fallen behind
in my career or whatever it was and i
had to learn to be strict with myself
within a partnership about attending to
my health habits attending to my work
letting my partner know how much space i
need and that's a hard one for fearful
avoidance right we are avoidant types we
need a lot of alone time but we often
feel like we can't ask for it in
relationships so as a fearful avoidant
in order to set proper boundaries you
have to start being willing to notice
when you need alone time and to ask for
it you don't have to wait until you're
out of a relationship to have some
freaking alone time and some freedom
okay you're supposed to have those
things within a relationship you just
grew up in an enmesh dynamic where that
wasn't true but as an adult it's allowed
to be true you're allowed to spend lots
of time with your friends you're allowed
to go on vacation by yourself you are
allowed to take a normal and healthy
sense of independence from your partner
you just have to learn to be aware of
when you need that and then to set that
boundary and this might show up as a
challenge for you even if you're not in
a relationship so it might be your work
that you need to set those boundaries
with it might be your friendships or
your family relationships but the idea
is to do away with that dichotomy you
have in your brain that tells you i can
either be free on my own or i can be
enmeshed and boundary-less around other
people and learn i can have
relationships where i also have freedom
and autonomy and independence or i can
be alone romantically but i can still
have fulfilling emotionally healthy and
emotionally intimate friendships or
family relationships or whatever it is
but what's gonna be really really
important for you is just paying
attention to your fantasies at every
step of the way and noticing even if the
fantasy is ridiculous like for example i
can't sing okay but i have fantasies
where i am singing like champagne
problems by taylor swift no one none of
you ever repeat this anywhere this is so
embarrassing i have fantasies where i'm
like singing champagne problems by
taylor swift to a large enthusiastic
crowd and they're all singing along with
me and it's like okay what is that
fantasy right it seems ridiculous but
let's break it down i am singing a sad
song about my distress and other people
are singing it with me that is emotional
mirroring right there is a part of me
that feels distressed and sad and
freaked out and it wants to communicate
that and have it mirrored back to me
okay so now i know that i probably need
that in one of my close relationships
there is something some sort of pain or
challenge i'm going through that i
really really want someone to see
recognize and reflect back to me so that
i feel less alone so now i need to
figure out which relationship is it
that's feeling like that and how can i
communicate that need so that the real
need gets fulfilled not just through
fantasy and by the way any type can do
this so all types have fantasies some
have more or less of them than others
but they are always telling you
something about a need you just have to
pay attention to
what is the feeling i get in this
fantasy okay not what's happening but
what am i feeling in it am i feeling
seen and understood am i feeling free
and independent and untethered
all of our fantasies are telling us
something very important about an
unfulfilled need and if we can pay
attention to that and then find a way to
get that actual need fulfilled it can
revolutionize our life okay it can help
us live in a completely different way
but first we have to learn to take those
feelings seriously notice them even if
they're only showing up in our fantasies
and then do something about them in real
life and again the same tools that are
going to help the anxiously attached
person and the avoidantly attached
person for you as a fearful avoidant are
gonna come in handy so you probably need
to do some re-parenting work you
probably could stand to use non-violent
communication tools to make your needs a
little bit more apparent and known to
other people both of those tools could
be really really big helps to you but
the important part is breaking down that
dichotomy in your mind between being
alone and being free to do whatever you
want and being in a relationship and
being trapped okay that does not need to
be true you can feel all things in
either situation and that's what it
means to be secure right secure people
feel like within a relationship they do
not lose their sense of self so they're
comfortable within a relationship and
outside of a relationship they also know
who they are and what they want and what
they love in life so they feel
comfortable on their own and that's
where each style needs to aim to end up
is in that secure place where they know
who they are on their own they know who
they are in a relationship and they can
communicate their needs in either
situation so i think that for today
that's all i have to say about
boundaries there's obviously a lot more
i could talk about on this topic so if
you guys have specific questions i am
very very happy to expand on this series
just let me know what you feel like
would be helpful for you and where
you're still struggling with this in
your life it's a really really hard one
it is kind of the holy grail of
attachment work is figuring out how to
set boundaries and how to live happily
within those boundaries and if you can
get to a better place with this it's
going to be really huge in your healing
so let me know where you're at in this
process where you're aiming to get to
and as always i love you guys and i will
see you again soon
[Music]
you