oh all right day 40 of the ENFP and
Quarantine good works so far team do we
have everyone present for the daily
council meeting fi I'm here yes at least
in the physical sense okay cool and te I
have been here for the past 10 minutes
as per usual it is you who has shown up
late cuckoo cuckoo cuckoo and si I'm
here yes I would like to volunteer to
take the notes we don't need notes why
are you the way that you are I'm so
sorry I will write that down
do not take notes okay so let's go over
what's been going on in the enfps brain
today yeah I planted some pretty good
ideas in there if I do say so myself
first open 30 new tabs in the computer
and I got her to look through like every
single one and then I went ahead and
gave her a deep sense of longing for the
life that she had before quarantine si
thank you so much for your help there I
could not have done it without you of
course and a sort of dramatic thrill
about what could happen once this is all
over uh at which point I tried to remind
the ENFP that this actually won't be
over until we have a vaccine so uh
perhaps we should take the time to just
slow down be still with our thoughts
reflect a little bit yeah and then I
took the liberty of plummeting or down a
rabbit Hall of government conspiracy
theories related to the virus I made two
different reddit accounts and got the
NFP to publicly argue with herself just
to stir the pot it feels so nice to get
upvotes
so where the conspiracy is real or yeah
it doesn't matter look here's the thing
for the evening okay so we get like a
really big really clear really vivid
picture of this meal we're gonna make
for all of her friends and get her like
super super excited about it yeah mm-hmm
and then as soon as the food goes on the
pot I'm just gonna light it on fire just
burn the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of all of it if you
just let me say
the timer I could make it cook perfectly
evenly not the point the point is that
well the food is burning the ENFP is
gonna get this like real deep sense of
shame I will make sure of that and that
is gonna inspire her to start
researching alternatives to capitalism
how on earth does that connect any had
me quatre eyes those two things together
honestly it's very hard to explain and
that should just about take us to bed
time uh that's when I get to reminder of
the profound sense of loneliness that's
inherent to the human condition yeah
sure you do that and I'll start
researching a whole bunch of random [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
to distract her with on Thursday House
meetings been pretty productive I feel
great about everything I personally have
a few follow-up questions any would you
mind meeting with me for just 5 maybe 10
max minutes when this is over I would
quite literally rather die literally I
would rather be dead all right everybody
else let's get this show on the road
it's been a good day let's not lose
momentum now I'm gonna make that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
weep this recipe seems easy enough to
make
[Music]