hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today we are talking
about a topic that I have been wanting
to make a video on forever this topic is
absolutely
instrumental in the process of healing
from any type of attachment wounding
from complex trauma or from essentially
any early core wound that kicked us off
of our own teams in life and held us
back from being able to Value ourselves
as individuals who are just as important
as anybody else on this Earth so this
topic is the topic of toxic shame before
we get started I want to make a couple
things clear I definitely did not invent
this term I didn't even come close to
inventing this term this term has been
around for a very long time I'm actually
not sure who the first person who
proposed it was however someone who has
written extensively on the topic of
toxic shame is John Bradshaw who is a
brilliant and tragically deceased
psychologist as well as Pete Walker who
I've referenced many times in these
videos particularly related to his work
on complex PTSD but both of these men
I'm going to draw heavily from The Works
of throughout this video so much of what
I say here is going to be an adaptation
an expansion on the material of John
Bradshaw particularly from his book
healing the shame that binds you I will
put a link to this book in the
description of this video I can not
recommend it heavily enough it is such a
wonderful compassionate comprehensive
view of this topic and I cannot imagine
having navigated the last couple years
of my attachment healing Journey without
having read it so with all of that being
said let's get into it what is toxic
shame how does it show up and how can we
begin combating it if we recognize that
it's something we are struggling with
the first thing I want to get clear on
is that shame in appropriate doses is
actually a very healthy thing that can
help us learn our limits in the world so
when we over indulge when we act in a
way that infringes on other people's
boundaries shame can come in to let us
know hey you overstepped in a particular
area you went too far with something you
were doing in some capacity you were
behaving in a way that was out of
Integrity with yourself so this is what
I'm going to call Healthy shame toxic
shame is different than healthy shame
toxic shame is the feeling that you do
not have any sense of Integrity to begin
with
so toxic shame is the belief that
something about us is corrupt rotten
broken dirty or wrong at our absolute
core when someone with healthy
self-esteem makes a mistake or goes past
their limits they feel healthy and
appropriate shame when someone who is as
John Bradshaw would call it shame Bound
in their identity someone who is bound
by toxic shame when they make a mistake
or go past their own or someone else's
limits becomes overwhelmed with the
feeling I am a mistake I am worthless
disgusting whatever it is that you
internalized about yourself at a very
young age that became the core of your
identity so the shame bound person
believes not I have temporarily fallen
out of Integrity with myself they
believe I have temporarily let the
social mask that I wear in the world to
prevent other people from noticing that
I don't have any worth their integrity
at my core flip and now I'm just
petrified that somebody has noticed and
I will do anything to cover it up now
what type of person tends to suffer from
toxic shame or shame bound identity
generally anyone who is fairly
significantly insecurely attached so
anything more than just a bit avoidant
or just a bit anxious is going to suffer
from toxic shame people who suffer from
complex post-traumatic stress disorder
tend to have shame bound identities and
I want to make it clear that this belief
you have about yourself as inherently
unworthy or flawed is not an accurate
representation of your worth as a human
being
the reason this came about and the
reason you began thinking of yourself in
this way is because early on in life
something broke your will
so John Bradshaw in the book healing the
shame that binds you talks about this
concept of a child's will being broken
your will is the part of your conscious
mind that believes that you are
inherently deserving of love care
protection Comfort respect all of the
things that every human being is
inherently worthy of
if your will is broken at a young age
you stop believing that you are worth
those things and instead you begin to
believe that you are inherently
worthless to compensate for this
Bradshaw goes over the ways in which we
learn to show up in the world as either
more than or less than human what it
means to develop a false Persona that is
more than human is to balance out that
toxic shame with grandiose beliefs about
ourselves I am the kindest purest most
innocent person in the world and
everything bad that has happened to me
has been some evil other person's fault
can be a type of grandiose thought
I am inherently better than other people
I am cooler smarter funnier I have more
money and better looking can also be a
grandiose thought these are ways of
making ourselves more than human
believing that we are in some objective
way better than everybody else
or we can adopt an identity that is less
than human so believing because I am so
bad flawed at my core I'm going to lean
into it I'm going to gravitate towards a
life of crime and addiction and things
that I believe a degenerate person like
myself would do that's a way of thinking
of the self as less than human and it's
really important to note here neither
view of the self is accurate at all of
our cores we are all inherently lovable
worthwhile human beings however some of
us have had traumatic experiences and
early experiences of disconnection and
shame that have caused us to internalize
something untrue about ourselves and
that thing that we internalize is what
we call toxic shame so I'm going to go
into a couple of ways you can recognize
in yourself or someone else the presence
of toxic shame so what happens once we
develop a shame-bound identity and how
that identity ends up perpetuating
itself as we go through life unless and
until we catch it and start to
consciously work with it so the first
thing that happens when we develop that
identity of toxic shame is we become
very cagey and inward in our
personalities including those of us who
are naturally more extroverted in nature
so even if we do attend lots of social
events and we do free frequently find
ourselves in the company of other people
we are always aware of the fact that we
must keep our true selves hidden when we
are around other people because we are
governed by this feeling of being
contaminated in some way and so to
compensate for this we learn to always
be a little bit defensive and guarded
around other people we might need to
make plans super far in advance because
we need to muster up the energy to bring
our false selves to the occasion because
it doesn't even occur to us when we are
shame bound that we could just go into a
situation and act authentic that is our
worst fear if we were acting authentic
someone might see our inner
contamination right so it takes a ton of
energy to engage in any social situation
in less and until we have fine-tuned a
very smooth very effective more than or
less than human Persona to play
and even in that case there are often
times where we just get exhausted from
playing that Persona so we might go
through periods where we're suddenly
canceling all of our plans ghosting all
of our friends taking a huge amount of
time to be alone and not be in
connection with others because to the
shame-bound person the only way to relax
and be authentic is to be alone where
there's no one around to catch you being
your actual self so there's this very
natural separation that happens between
the you that you present to the world
and the you who you are when you're
alone with yourself does everybody have
this to a small extent yes however the
shame-bound person lives it every minute
of the day who they are and their social
Persona are radically different and it
does not even occur to them most of the
time that there is a world in which
those two things could be the same which
bleeds into the next trait that we see
in people who have shame bound
identities their can be a confusion of
who you are between your real and your
fake self
so this is not something that is super
conscious for you if you are shame bound
and have never really thought of it in
that term before it's not that you're
going to a party and you're like okay
time to put on my fake self as I do
before I go to a party it's more like
you are frantically trying to find a way
to self-regulate with the view of
yourself as a competent worthwhile okay
person and how you might be doing that
is through getting validation from
others through achieving things in the
external world through if you have one
of those less than human personas
getting validation of your own Badness
of the fact that you are accepted among
the people who are considered
unacceptable by the rest of society and
the only indication that you're behaving
inauthentically might come in the form
of frequent recurring depressive
episodes
that come online when you have been
acting from your false self for too long
and you absolutely exhaust yourself
hit a wall and Retreat for a long period
of time to regain your energy until
you're ready to show up in the world
again as your false self I don't know if
there's a person alive out there who
suffers from toxic shame who does not
also suffer from frequent recurring
bouts of depression or anxiety those
things go hand in hand because
depression and anxiety are the natural
result of existing in the world in an
inauthentic way and again this is not
you intentionally deciding to be an
authentic it is you not knowing that
authenticity is an option for someone
like you which leads us to the third
sign of a toxically shamed or
shame-bound individual which is that you
avoid psychological mirrors so it's
quite common when people don't like the
way that they look physically to just
avoid mirrors for a period of time in
order to hide their own judgments from
themselves
and this is psychologically what you are
doing if you have a shame bound identity
by not showing yourself to anybody else
in an authentic way you are avoiding
having your true self mirrored back to
you by anybody why are you doing that
because you are terrified of what you
might see if you look in that
psychological mirror where do we find
psychological mirrors inside of intimate
relationships when we truly grow to love
trust and show ourselves to another
human being exactly as we are we give
them the opportunity to reflect us back
to ourselves through their responses and
interactions to us that is what intimacy
is it is two people being present with
the absolute whole of each other both
the good stuff and the bad stuff if you
are a person with a shame bound identity
you will spend your life avoiding
intimacy like the plague and I want to
be clear you can be extremely anxiously
attached and be terrified of intimacy
those with more avoidant leaning
attachment Styles tend to more
consciously be aware of the fact that
they're afraid of intimacy but those
with anxious attachment Styles tend to
believe that they are intimacy junkies
when in reality what they are trying to
do is shove the ideal vision of
themselves the way they would like to be
seen Down someone else's throat so hard
that someone looks back at them and goes
okay that's the real you for sure you
are an innocent pure perfect being who's
100 deserving of love in every single
moment unconditionally
that is not the truth of anybody all of
us kind of suck sometimes however you do
not suck in the huge overwhelming
terrifying way that your toxic shame is
telling you you suck in so you might be
using avoidant tactics you might be
using anxious tactics you might be using
a variety of manipulation tools to keep
yourself out of intimacy even if you are
in a romantic relationship with someone
else but it is a classic characteristic
of someone who is shame bound to avoid
intimacy at all costs because you are
terrified that if someone actually saw
you they would not want to be around you
you can be married for like 70 years and
never have any moment of true intimacy
with your partner this is not as hard to
do as it might sound though again you
are likely to have frequent bouts of
mental health issues anxiety depression
whatever it is if you are chronically
engaging with people using your false
Persona now the next thing that happens
when our authentic selves become shame
bound is that we lose connection with
our inner wisdom our inner wisdom comes
to us in the form of feelings emotions
and body States things like anger Joy
grief pleasure calmness and serenity all
of these feelings are giving us pieces
of information that help us discern what
is right and wrong for us in life
however to be shame-bound means that
from a young age we learned that there
was something wrong with the fact that
we have feelings so if we believe that
our feelings are inherently shameful
what we learn to do is either disconnect
from them consciously and learn to over
rely on logic to make decisions in all
situations including situations in which
emotional information is the most
important factor in decision making or
we become dissociated from our true
moment-to-moment feelings but in order
to continue feeling intensely we become
addicted to Fantasy so we create an
elaborate fantasy world inside of our
own minds we pick people to become
limerent about if you don't know what
that word means I have a video I will
link in the description of this video
called limerence what it is and how to
let it go and we feel most of our
feelings within that fantasy life that
we create
why because that fantasy life is where
we are safe because there are no
spontaneous feelings that will ever
arrive within that fantasy world because
we are in control of what happens there
when you are shame bound you are
terrified of spontaneous feelings
arising in the body because you believe
that your feelings are shameful and so
you only allow yourself to feel things
that you have pre-decided you will feel
so if you're telling yourself this crazy
romantic story in your head about
something that's going to happen between
you and your crush you might feel
totally safe in that moment to let
yourself feel excitement Joy passion but
in the moment that you're actually in
front of that person you might feel
Frozen scared and excited for things to
just hopefully go the exact way you plan
for them to go based on the fake persona
you are presenting to them and then you
can go home and feel all your real
feelings when you are alone and Ergo
safe and again this is not something
that anybody would consciously choose
you did not choose to either disconnect
from those feelings and over rely on
logic or disconnect from your real
feelings and over rely on fantasy
feelings or both this is simply the way
that you adapted based on the way that
you were raised to avoid feelings of
overwhelming shame that get triggered
when you feel a spontaneous emotion you
learn to Orchestra your life in such a
way that very few if any spontaneous
emotions ever Arise at all and one of
the last signs that you likely have a
shame-bound identity is that you have
addictive behaviors addictive behaviors
in the shame-bound person develop as a
replacement for human intimacy
so John Bradshaw talks about addictions
as a false secure base
when we have a secure base in another
human being it means we have a place we
know we can continuously return to to
get comfort co-regulation and protection
when life gets really overwhelming for
the person with a shame-bound identity
trusting another person and forming an
intimate connection with them is too
risky because then they're going to see
who you actually are right but we all
need a feeling of a secure base so if a
person can't provide it we're going to
try to find something else that we can
use to consistently regulate ourselves
that could be alcohol it could also be
spending it could be working it could be
getting likes on social media it could
be fantasy it could be religious or
spiritual rituals it could be feelings
of Rage feelings of excitement it could
be an obsession or a fixation on the
idea of another person who we project
all of these fantasies onto it could be
a codependent pattern in which both
people are shame bound and having a
pseudo relationship with each other the
intensity and drama of which you can get
addicted to any of these things and many
more can serve as a false secure base in
the absence of the ability to form a
truly intimate connection with another
human being oh food is another humongous
one either overeating or restricting our
access to it I have yet to meet a single
shame bound person who does not have a
long history of being addicted to
something even if that person is
completely sober even if that person has
never touched drugs or alcohol in their
lives there are Myriad things we can get
addicted to that are not substances
anything we use as a replacement for
having a secure base inside of ourselves
or other people counts as an addiction
if we feel as though we need it in order
to regulate ourselves so now we're going
to shift away from some of the signs of
having a shame bound identity into the
solutions so what do we do to free
ourselves from this prison that toxic
shame puts us in
I want to be clear that this is a very
long process however it is a process
very much worth taking on because every
moment we can free ourselves from toxic
shame is one moment where we get our own
aliveness back so it only gets better
the further along this road we travel
and before I talk about the specific
steps involved I'm going to talk about
what the last step in healing from toxic
shame is and this step is one that takes
a long time to complete but all the
steps that precede it are going to be
working up to this the end goal of
healing from toxic shame is exposing
your true self to the world
so getting in touch with who you
actually are at your core
understanding that there is nothing
wrong shameful or bad about it and then
existing in the world as your authentic
self so no longer having to save up your
energy in order to spend it pretending
to be your false self in social
interactions no more avoiding your true
feelings because you are terrified of
what will come up if you are present in
the moment no more zoning out
dissociating detaching from reality so
you don't have to risk feeling anything
you can now be present in every moment
because you are not trying to hide
anything if you are watching this and
you are thinking that is never going to
happen for me there will never be a time
where I feel that way I felt the exact
same way as you years ago in my own life
if there is a person who believed this
was not possible it was me
if I can get to the place where I can
sit in front of you and tell you this is
a realistic and possible end goal
anybody can get there because I was as
cynical a person as they come in this
department so let's talk about which
steps get you to this place where you're
able to begin showing up as you actually
are in the world the first step is
developing or at least entertaining the
idea of a neutral self
so when we have a shame-bound identity
we Ricochet between thinking we are the
absolute scum of the earth and thinking
that we are either more than or less
than human in some massive way the truth
lies in the middle there is nothing
inherently bad broken flawed about us
and so there is no need to balance it
out with these extreme grandiose
thoughts you at your core are just like
everybody else the reason you have all
these neurotic habits the reason you
have a history of addiction or failed
relationships the reason why you believe
you are broken at your core is because
you had different experiences than other
people which caused you to internalize
different messages about yourself than
other people internalized however you at
your core are the exact same as
everybody else
all the stuff that's on top of it that's
just trauma that's just experiences
that's just patterns you have
internalized that you can learn to let
go of
so at the least entertaining that idea
allowing yourself to spend some time
thinking about the concept that maybe
you are just like everybody else maybe
the reason you're different is because
you've internalized different things is
the birthplace of this concept of
self-neutrality and I am going to make
an entire video about self-neutrality
how to define and how to practice it but
in essence all you have to do at this
step is entertain the idea that what I'm
saying here is true and you are not the
exception because there is not an
exception if you are alive you are as
inherently worthwhile as every other
person and all of the weird stuff that
separates you from them is a product of
the experiences you have had that are
different step two that I think can be
really helpful for people who are just
steeped in that toxic shame is to seek
out mirrors for yourself within Solitude
so what does this mean that final step
in the process is opening yourself up to
the world showing up as you
authentically are and allowing people to
mirror you back to yourself that is
probably terrifying from the place where
you are starting out
so what you need to do is go looking for
people who can mirror you as you are
right now without you actually having to
interact with them it means seeking out
resources videos books courses made by
people who have overcome toxic shame I
had a period of at least a year and a
half where pretty much all I did was
read obsessively I read John Bradshaw
Alice Miller Pete Walker pretty much
every 12-step book that has ever been
written you can be atheistic as hell and
still get a lot out of those books I
looked for every resource I could
possibly find about people who once
believed they were inherently flawed and
broken and who got better
and I learned to see myself in the early
stages of those people's stories so
there's a quote that I really love from
Pete Walker's book cptsd from surviving
to thriving where he talks about how
this process unfolded for himself and he
goes it was not until later in life
after I had quite a few years of group
and individual therapy that I realized
that my journey of recovery had actually
begun decades before my formal therapy
had
it began with all the therapeutic
reading and writing I'd instinctively
gravitated towards
I unconsciously sought the help of
others in the many spiritual and
psychological self-help books that I was
intuitively drawn to
without really understanding it I gained
valuable insights about how to improve
the way that I treated myself and others
just as importantly I subliminally
realized that there were a number of
good safe wise and helpful adults out
there
who could be trusted and who had a great
deal of wise and kind guidance to offer
over time the authors in my community of
books seemed like a small tribe of
Elders
who I imagined as people who would have
empathy for me if I were to meet them
eventually when I achieved something of
a critical mass of this awareness I
managed to take a frightening leap into
the water of therapy
I lucked out and got a good enough
therapist to help me take steps in my
healing that I could not manage on my
own what this step is all about is
recognizing that there is a world out
there in which the shame the pain the
self-disgust and self-hatred that you
feel has been felt by other people who
have found their way out of hell and
that means that there is a way out of
hell and you could find it too which
brings us to The Next Step this step is
what I call the stripping down process
once we become aware and consciously
accept the fact that we've been
operating from a place of toxic shame
and that that shame is not our true
identity we are tasked with getting to
know who our true self is in order to
figure out who we are we have to figure
out who we are not
so this process involves us revisiting
the story that we tell ourselves about
our own lives if you have toxic shame
there is a 100 chance you have
internalized a view of yourself as
worthless that has pervaded throughout
the majority of the time that you have
had conscious memories in this step
you're going to need to revisit the past
and start to properly understand why you
developed the beliefs about yourself
that you did and why you no longer need
to carry those beliefs with you some
resources I recommend for this adult
children of Alcoholics and dysfunctional
families is a brilliant and free
resource for doing this work ACA is a
12-step program I recommend it quite
often because I believe it is such a
wonderful compliment to or if you cannot
afford it alternative to therapy though
I highly recommend having a therapist as
you work through the program if that's
possible for you so you can find online
meetings for ACA no matter where you are
in the world or you can find in-person
meetings in most cities in the world
world and in these meetings you will go
over with a group a plethora of
experiences that you may have had that
could have caused you to develop the
types of defenses responses and beliefs
that you had about yourself when you
were young that you did and in these
meetings people also systematically
dismantle those old negative beliefs
about the self and speak openly about
what they're now realizing is and is not
true about them so if you find the right
group it is a safe place to begin
practicing sharing yourself
authentically in very small and
controlled doses now if for whatever
reason you are uninterested or unable to
attend ACA therapy is also a wonderful
wonderful thing you can take on at this
point in the process my belief is that
most people who have toxic shame take a
long time to be comfortable with the
thought of showing up authentically in
therapy as well I had to read like every
single a book on the planet before I
felt comfortable finally going to a
therapist and being honest with them I
think I had like three therapists in my
life prior to that point and I just lied
and bsed my way through every single
appointment and those therapists only
ever met my fake invulnerable self but
once I got to that point that Pete
Walker had gotten to where he had
started to believe that they were kind
competent and capable adults in the
world who would be able and willing to
care about someone with a shame-bound
identity I intentionally found a
therapist who I actually did deeply
believe was capable of understanding me
a therapist who had worked themselves
out of a shame bound place in their own
life and who was very open about it so
you're going to need to consciously seek
out other perspectives to help you make
sense of what has happened to you once
again the place I recommend starting
here is healing the shame that binds you
with John Bradshaw it is the most direct
resource I can offer because he has
chapter after chapter after chapter in
this book where all he does is go into
extreme detail about where your shame
bound identity may have come from and
what you may have internalized about
yourself that was not completely correct
something else I'm going to recommend
about this step of the process is as
much as you are able to it can help to
abstain from any addictions that you
have developed so if you chronically
overeat or drink alcohol to soothe your
shame at this point in the process it
might be extremely helpful to with the
help of support groups if you have them
give up your over-reliance on those
substances or on those addictive thought
patterns and see what comes up when you
are not self-regulating through them so
I spend almost a couple of years
completely sober I did nothing harder
than Advil while I was doing this work
and I don't believe personally that I
could have gotten to the other side of
the toxic shame work well I was still
numbing myself out with food alcohol
drugs excitement travel fantasy all of
the things that I would do to keep
myself disconnected from my inner core
it is not easy to give up those
addictions and I don't want you to think
that you are a complete failure if you
can't do it with 100 accuracy the
important part is to be highly conscious
of the fact that we are reaching to
those things to mask what's underneath
them which is that feeling of toxic
shame that feeling of Shame is what we
eventually with the help and support of
therapists of group members of people
who are in the process with us access
stay present with and work through so we
can get to the other side of it I
remember one of the last addictions to
go for me when I was in this process of
shedding myself of all of these false
self behaviors and trying to get in
touch with who I actually was was my
addiction to travel so I for a period of
like five or six years moved countries
every month I was a digital Nomad I
absolutely could not function if I did
not have a series of trips planned that
I could self-regulate through fan
disease of what they would be like when
I got there actually being on the trips
was not nearly as important as escaping
from the present moment through planning
and thinking about them and I remember
my therapist asking me at one point what
if you just stopped what if you just
stayed in one place for a while and
dealt with the pain that came up as a
result
and I remember telling him this is what
it's like to be me
my whole life I have felt like I am
paddling on a raft through this
incredibly stormy ocean and if I stop
paddling for one minute I'm going to
fall off and absolutely drown and every
fiber of my being at the time believed
that if I did not keep going if I did
not stay addicted to this constant
motion to this constant movement to this
constant distraction from the present
moment I would absolutely drown because
what I thought would happen if I stopped
was that I would encounter myself that I
would have to look at myself in the
mirror and see a terrible shameful
monster looking back at me
what actually happened the first time I
looked in that mirror was that I
realized there was never a monster there
was just a person like everybody else
who yeah has some flaws has some things
to work on but nothing in the realm of
flaws or things I have to work on were
anywhere close we're not even in the
same solar system as the level of fear
that I had around what I thought maybe I
would see and the reason I tell that
story is because I believe there is some
sense of that within every person who
has a shame bound identity the first
time I ever told that to someone it was
another person who I knew in my personal
life they looked back at me and said my
entire life I have felt like I'm
standing on the edge of a cliff and if I
take one wrong step I'm going to fall
off it
and that was the first honest
conversation about shame that I ever had
with another human being who had their
own chainbound identity and I believe
there is some aspect present for
everyone who suffers from toxic shame of
that intense overwhelming fear that if
you look at it you will absolutely die
something terrible will happen and it
will be a thing that you cannot come
back from
that is not true there is nothing in
reality you could possibly find out
about yourself that is as terrible as
what you are imagining now that being
said yes you might get triggered you
might get overwhelmed you could
re-traumatize yourself in the process if
you are not moving through it at an
appropriate and self-protective Pace
this is why you need support groups you
need a therapist if you can find one you
need guidance and mentorship and in
order to do that you have to again go
back to step one and two find a way to
convince yourself that there are others
in the world who have been through this
process who can be in some way trusted
because the penultimate step in this
process is learning to face
sit with and be present with the actual
shame the shame that you have spent your
entire life and have made every choice
you have made in an effort to avoid a
second to last step in the healing
process is learning to be present with
it and work with it in the body at this
point in my life when I feel a toxic
shame attack which happens less
frequently than it used to but not never
what I try to do is pull that feeling of
Shame into my body get really acquainted
with it
notice what's happening in my arms in my
torso in my legs in my head become
extremely aware of How It's impacting me
physically
and then saying out loud shame this is
shame this is shame and the more I can
repeat that to myself and stay aware of
the feeling in my body and present with
it the more I start to realize this is a
Feeling
it is not an objective representation of
reality
it is just a physical sensation in the
body and I can survive it
it is not telling me the truth about who
I am it is not a crystal ball that is
showing me the core of who I am as a
person it is just a feeling state that
at one point in my life allowed me to
shut down in a way that was adaptive at
that time
however I am not a child anymore I can
be present with this shame now I can
name it I can look at it and I can
recognize I am still here surviving it I
am not dying in the process of
encountering and making myself familiar
to this shame I am not trying to escape
it I don't need to escape it it can't
hurt me
it's here it's happening I'm surviving
it and the more we do all of these steps
the more we tear down our false selves
get acquainted with our life stories as
they actually happened learn to
integrate and be present with our shame
the more we will find out about who we
actually are underneath that shame what
are interests and passions and talents
are as the people we actually are
because underneath that toxic shame
there is not a scary monster there is
your actual soul and your actual soul is
made up of good stuff interesting stuff
the same stuff that everybody else is at
their core made up of and getting back
in touch with that version of yourself
that you might have stuffed away at like
three years old is really fun you get to
learn what your interests are you get to
learn and reinvent and choose who you
would have become if you had had the
chance to choose that as a child maybe
your real self is a guitarist maybe
they're an astronaut I always knew I was
like a nerd and that part of me remained
true but I also learned that my real
self hikes and plays piano there is so
many surprises about yourself that you
will find out in this process the more
you're able to tear away these defenses
and get at the core of who you actually
are underneath all of them and once you
arrive at that person then you get to
learn to reintegrate that person into
the world to find activities and
communities that mirror who you actually
are back to you in a way that's really
exciting and fulfilling because you're
no longer having these fake interactions
you're having real authentic embodied
interactions that you can go into not
having to hide any part of yourself that
is that final step in healing from toxic
shame is realizing that you can be the
same person everywhere you go because
you have thought through that Wall of
Shame you've been terrified of looking
at your whole life and it turned out
underneath it was actually a pretty cool
person and that there is not a reason on
Earth why other people wouldn't like as
well
and all of those scary things in your
past all of the traumas all of the
hardships all of the mental illnesses
all of the coping mechanisms you
developed as a response to that shame
you have now found a way to speak about
in a self-contained way and maybe you
end up becoming one of those people who
someone else with toxic shame one day
looks up to as the living proof that
they can also recover from it alright
that's all I'm going to say for today on
the topic of toxic shame this topic
could be explored in a 25 hour long
video and we would still only be
scratching the surface but I hope that
gives you an idea of the fundamentals of
how toxic shame Works how to recognize
it in yourself and what needs to happen
for you to begin the healing process
as always let me know in the comments
what your thoughts reactions feelings
are as you watch this I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and your inner children
even if they are currently buried under
a wall of toxic shame that your job in
the future is going to be to free them
from and I will see you back here again
super soon
foreign
[Music]