hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we are
talking about self-esteem which is a
topic that I'm very excited about and
today in particular we're talking about
the relationship between toxic shame and
the addiction to selfimprovement
now if you don't know what I mean when I
say the term toxic shame I do have a
video Linked In the description of this
one that goes over what that term means
and how you can recognize it showing up
in your own life and your own psychology
but for those of us who are all too
familiar with this term we're going to
dive into how struggling with toxic
shame can lead us to get overly fixated
on personal
development now when we talk about
personal development I'm essentially
talking about any habit or routine or
goals that we set and take on in an
attempt to build up our ego and it's
important to note here that ego building
is a very nor Al part of life when I use
the term ego what I mean is essentially
the part of ourselves that is monitoring
the relationship we have between our
subjective inner world and how we fit in
the objective outer world so our egos
help us secure resources they help us
think about things like hey what skills
do I have and what job might I be able
to get that allows me to exchange my
skills for things like money so that I
can develop more Security in the world
or so that I can go pursue more
opportunities and open more doors for
myself so our egos are very important
things and there's nothing wrong with
being strategic and thoughtful about
which skills we want to develop and what
ways we want to work on ourselves so
that we can have a more easeful exchange
between our inner worlds and our outer
world but like anything in life what is
benign under the right circumstances can
be absolutely addictive and destructive
under the wrong ones so if we are
pursuing self Improvement not because we
want to bring more of our authentic self
into the world but because we are
wanting to distance ourselves from our
authentic selves and put more of our
fake selves into the world because we
believe that that's the only version of
our self that would be accepted by the
world this is when we start to develop a
toxic relationship with self-improvement
because we are essentially trying to
kill off our Essence and start living
fulltime as a version of ourselves that
leaves out a lot of who we are at our
core we're going to talk about what that
looks like as a video goes on but for
now I also just want to hark back to
John Bradshaw who wrote The Incredible
Book healing the shame that binds you
and the way that he kind of looks at
addiction through the lens of toxic
shame so he says that for the toxically
shamed person anything that temporarily
takes away the pain of being oneself can
become an addiction so this this can be
drugs and alcohol or it can be online
shopping or it can be romantic Obsession
or liance or it can be planning out
goals habits routines and regulating
with this idea of an idealized self that
we don't have to be ashamed of if
thinking about that is giving us
reprieve from this underlying condition
of toxic shame that we live with where
we feel as though it's unbearable to be
ourselves this can very easily become an
addiction so we're going to go over five
signs that this might be an addiction
for you and then we're going to talk
about how to develop a healthier
relationship with self-improvement
because again it's really wonderful to
think about which skills you want to
develop and which ways you want to show
up in the world that are different from
how you're showing up now but we want to
make sure that when we're doing that
we're taking ourselves with us we're not
neglecting and leaving behind major
parts of who we are I want to make clear
that we can get addicted either to the
actual actions so to going out and
starting new routines or setting new
goals and working really hard towards
them or we can get addicted to just
thinking about it so to sitting at home
reading self-improvement blogs or
watching videos on ways in which we
would like to change and then
disappearing into a fantasy world where
we have already made all of those
changes and finally we can be proud to
be ourselves so either the literal
actions or or fantasizing about the
actions can become an addiction and if
you find yourself more of the fantasy
persuasion I do have a video on
self-regulating through fantasizing
about the future that I'll link in the
description of this video and it's
likely going to be a really nice
compliment to this one now when I
picture someone who has toxic shame
thinking about their idealized self what
instantly comes to mind is this kind of
image of a person trapped at the bottom
of a well and they're looking upwards at
this idealized vision of themselves
standing outside of the well in the
sunlight and they're desperately trying
to climb up out of the well to get to
that person but the problem is they're
so panicked about the fact that they're
in the well that they're not really
taking the time to understand their
surroundings they're just kind of
clamoring up the wall as quickly as they
can and then continuously falling back
down or they might actually make it out
of the well a few times but then within
a number of weeks months or years
somehow find that they have fallen back
in the well itself being a metaphor for
our deep shame and the only way to get
out of that well and to get to the place
where you are standing in the sunlight
with a sense of Pride and dignity is to
accept that you first have to
internalize that sense of dignity inside
of the well it is the thing that will
allow you to climb out and stay out
because that sense of dignity and that
sense that it is okay for me to be
inside of this well it makes sense that
I have fallen into it that kind of
belief is the sort of belief that calms
our nervous system enough to be able to
start actually looking around the well
getting to know it and understanding the
most effective route out as well as how
to avoid falling into it in the future
so before we talk about how to do that
we're going to quickly go over five
signs that you might be using self
Improvement as an addictive way to stay
out of the present moment where you
experience yourself in a toxically
shamed way the first sign that you might
have a toxic or unhealthy relationship
to self-improvement is that you are very
willing to root for the future version
of you that you are trying to get to but
you feel nothing but contempt and
disgust when you think of the person you
are now so you might feel really good
when you're taking steps to change
yourself or when you're imagining
yourself taking steps to change yourself
because you're imagining that you're
doing that work in service of someone
who you actually love which is your
idealized self but you don't love the
self who is doing the work and the self
who is doing the work in the present
moment is the only self that exists
everything including our visions of the
future and memories of the past are all
happening right now you either love
yourself in the moment or you don't love
yourself the those are the only options
so when we start talking about how to
shift into a healthier relationship with
self-improvement we're going to talk
about how to show love and respect for
the person who is doing the improving
rather than only having respect for the
idea of ourselves who is done improving
sign too that you might have an
unhealthy or toxic relationship with
self-improvement is that you use
self-improvement as an excuse to isolate
and to hide yourself away from other
people so there's this video that went
viral I think sometime last year that
was pushing this idea that if you're in
a rough Place take six months disappear
from your life and come back as a
version of yourself who your friends and
family won't even recognize and I
remember thinking that is such a toxic
relationship to
self-improvement why would you want your
friends and family to not recognize you
those are the people who love you for
who you are if you were to fundamentally
change in a way where the people who
love you for who you are no longer
recognize you that would probably mean
you'd made some pretty negative
character changes but the kind of
implicit message behind this video
seemed to be people will love you more
if you take a big break and come back as
a more superficially impressive person
and I think that for a lot of people
with toxic shame this is truly and
deeply a belief that they hold and I was
no exception to this for the majority of
my life when I lived with toxic shame
anytime I started feeling an overwhelm
of shame I would use self-improvement as
an excuse to isolate from the world get
really focused on some objective thing I
wanted to improve like getting fitter or
making more money or developing some new
skill and I would kind of disengage from
the rest of my life for long periods of
time while I was making those
improvements believing that I could only
engage with other people and with the
world if I were as close to perfect as
possible and so when I started feeling
an overwhelm of shame I would head into
a period of reclusion and self-work
believing that I would come back as an
acceptable version of
myself now not everyone is able to do
this because maybe they have long-term
commitments like full-time jobs that
they can't simply Retreat from for six
months so another version of this sign
number three that you might have an
unhealthy relationship to
self-improvement is that you are using
it to hide in plain sight so maybe
you're not literally retreating for 6
months and not answering your phone
calls or showing up to work but maybe
you are refusing to relate to other
people as the person that you are and
the only thing you're willing to talk
about is the person you are becoming so
when people ask you what's new with you
or how you're feeling the answers you
might give are chronically answers about
plans you have for the future you're not
staying present with people you're not
talking about what's going on for you
today or right now or this week you're
almost frantically trying to get them to
not notice there is a present you and to
Instead try to kind of sell them on this
future version of you that you believe
is less shameful and you might get
really angry triggered or disregulated
if people say anything even in complete
and total innocence that reminds you
that who you are right now is not that
future version of you and that there are
literal tangible differences between the
you in reality and the you in your
future fantasies or the you that you are
taking steps towards becoming so again
this is a way of kind of hiding in plain
sight we're trying to get the people
around us to not notice who we actually
are and obscure that with a vision of
our future selves that we want them to
treat us as though we already are
because again that's the only version of
oursel that we think deserves respect
and fair treat
now sign number four that you might have
an unhealthy relationship to
self-improvement which very naturally
follows steps two and three is that you
go through cycles of extreme work on
yourself and then burnout or collapse
and the reason this happens is because
if we are self-improving in a way that
is not bringing our whole self with us
so let's say we decide we're going to
get really fit or we're going to earn an
extra $100,000 in the next year and we
start gunning for these goals without
giving ourselves any sense of relaxation
or comfort and in fact Talking to
Ourselves quite abusively if those needs
come online so saying things to
ourselves like oh come on you're so
pathetic just stop whining and stay on
track with your goals or when we become
depressed or lifeless in pursuit of them
telling ourselves that doesn't matter
we'll be happy once we get there when we
are compartmentalizing ourself like that
and denying ourselves things like
Comfort or rest or Joy because we think
that people who need those things are
pathetic and weak what we are doing is
guaranteeing future burnout because
human beings need all of those things
and if we do not intentionally give
ourselves those things for long enough
our bodies will eventually Revolt to get
those needs met in other ways we will
become sick or depressed or angry or
anxious beyond measure if we try to go
on for long periods of time denying
humongous parts of our emotional
experience so again when we have a
healthier relationship to
self-improvement we are bringing our
whole selves with us as we're doing the
improving so we are attending to things
like our need for rest and comfort and
co-regulation while we're making our
improvements which might mean that the
improvements happen at a slightly slower
Pace but this is akin to climbing up out
of that well at a steady but slow pace
instead of scaling 3/4s of it really
quickly and then falling back down and
having to start again and then falling
back down right so it slows our progress
but it means that we actually make
progress and we're going to talk more
about that very soon the fifth sign that
you might have an unhealthy or toxic
relationship to self-improvement is that
one of the main things you are trying to
do through self-improvement is stay in
control of which feelings you are having
when
so I talked about this a little bit in
the original video that I made about
toxic shame but when we have toxic shame
essentially we are terrified of
experiencing spontaneous feelings
because we believe that there are some
feelings it is deeply shameful to have
in the first place we can't possibly
leave ourselves open to what is just the
natural state of living which is
experiencing a wide range of emotions in
a somewhat unexpected way you can wake
up one day and if you are authentic Ally
engaged with your life and not blocked
off to any particular feelings feel
everything from Rage to lust to Joy
within the course of a single day but if
you are terrified of experiencing
certain feelings what you might do is
become incredibly rigid about your
habits and your lifestyle and what you
do and don't engage with in the world in
order to guarantee that you're getting
the hits of dopamine that you need to
stay functional but only in ways that do
not bring up shame so I'm only going to
focus on hitting my goals and I'm not
going to leave myself open to let's say
Taking Chances on letting people and
relationships impact me because those
things are unpredictable so I'm only
going to engage in relationships that
feel very low risk and that I know are
unlikely to bring up significant
feelings of Shame so if we are
self-improving and doing work on
ourselves in a way that is actually
making us less open to being impacted by
the world around us we are engaging with
self-improvement in a toxic way real
wholehearted self-improvement where we
bring our entire true selves into the
goals that we set and the work that we
do makes us more open to the world
around us and the people who make it up
and all of the spontaneous emotions that
are consistently arising as a result of
being open to the world as it actually
is and as the people we actually are so
so again healthy self-improvement often
looks like making ourselves more
resilient in the face of Shame so that
we can stay more open to all areas of
our life rather than trying to control
the conditions of our life so that we
don't experience shame this is the core
difference between healthy and unhealthy
self-improvement are we becoming more
shame resilient so that we can actually
tolerate shame or go take many more
risks in the world and expose ourselves
to deeper relationships and experiences
of life or are we trying to narrow our
world so that we are keeping shame out
and now we're going to transition into
briefly talking about how you can heal
your relationship with self-improvement
so that you're coming at it from a more
holistic and effective place so my
personal belief is that if you have
toxic shame what you need to be focusing
on is not self-esteem because for you
self-esteem is likely to look more like
a dis associative fantasy and what you
need to focus on first and foremost is
developing
dignity dignity is the art of respecting
all parts of ourselves even the parts of
ourselves that we wish were different so
refusing to kick ourselves off our own
teams if there's something happening
within us that we wish were not
happening and instead being willing to
stay present and on the page with
ourselves the way a loving parent would
stay on the page with their child who is
struggling in some way when we have
dignity it means we have the strength to
face whatever pain is coming up for us
in the present moment and stay on our
own team when we are able to stay
present with the things that feel very
shameful in our lives what happens is
we're able to focus on and attune to our
lives as they exist right now which
helps us find real solutions to what we
are struggling with solutions that are
not dissociative and unrealistic but
ones that are actually going to help us
gain some foothold to take steps out of
the problems that we've found ourselves
stuck in in life dignity is your inner
parent saying to your inner child it's
okay that you have ended up where you
have ended up in life it makes sense
based on what has happened to you that
you've ended up here so let's look at
where we're at together with compassion
and let's figure out what we need to
change as a team so that we can end up
somewhere better where we feel less
defended and more open to the world
around us I am going to stay present
with you and I'm going to help you get
there I am not going to abuse you along
the way so how do we start developing
that sense of dignity the first thing we
want to do is start using self-
neutrality as a tool for showing respect
to our shame bound parts so I do have a
video on what self- neutrality is and
how to practice it which I will link in
the description of this one but
essentially self neutrality is the
willingness to just look at our lives
including the parts that we're very
ashamed of from a place of total
Detachment and objectivity so instead of
asking ourselves why am I in all this
debt why can't I find a partner what's
wrong with me why don't I have any
friends we ask the same or similar
questions in a totally different tone
why am I in debt what happened to me in
life that made managing money so
difficult why don't I have a partner
what skills around intimacy did I never
learn why do I feel like there's
something wrong with me where does that
belief come from and am I 100% sure that
it's true why do I isolate so much what
purpose is that serving for me we start
looking at all of these parts of
ourselves that we might be really angry
at ourselves for and actually ask those
parts how are you trying trying to help
me what do you think that your job is in
my life and this is an area where
something like internal family systems
which is a therapeutic model that looks
at the self as a series of Parts all of
which are functioning to serve you but
which might get into conflict with each
other can be really helpful so a book
that I heavily recommend on this is
called no bad parts by Richard Schwarz
and it's all about learning to
appreciate even the parts of ourselves
that we feel really mad at understanding
how they're trying their best to serve
us and then figuring out how we can work
more effectively and get all of these
parts communicating with each other
better so that we get those same needs
met in ways that lead to or cause less
negative side effects but this step of
developing dignity is essentially just
learning to respect the parts of
ourselves that we are used to abusing
and becoming willing to see them in a
different light when we have respect for
all parts of ourselves we don't have to
frequently dissociate from ourselves
because we don't have that belief that
there are very bad corrupt shameful
parts of ourselves we understand that
there are just wires getting crossed
internally and that it's possible if
we're willing to stay Associated to
ourselves to uncross those wires and
develop a new system which leads us to
step two if we're able to stay more
Associated to our lives what we're also
going to be able to do is reality check
our shame beliefs and when necess NE
adjust our shame environments so what
does this mean there is a psychologist
named Dr Marsha linan who has this
concept of checking to see whether our
shame fits the facts of a given
situation so in her kind of
conceptualization of Shame Shame is the
feeling that lets us know we are going
to get rejected by other people if we
continue to behave in this certain way
and she recommends that when you feel
shame you might want to check in with
yourself and go am I actually going to
get rejected from this environment if I
behave in that way or if I say that
thing or is this something that I
developed a shame belief around because
at the time that I formed this belief
this thing would have gotten me rejected
but maybe here it doesn't apply and the
cool thing is that we also have the
opportunity to start becoming self-aware
about which environments we're placing
ourselves in maybe we have self-
selected environments that have the same
rules about what gets us rejected that
our early caregiving environments did
but we have the option to start
selecting new communities new workplaces
new types of Partners who will not
reject us for the parts of ourselves
that would like to exist more fully in
the world so if I'm an artist at heart
and I've chosen a career in finance
because my creativity is shame bound the
more self-aware I become the more I can
start looking at how have I created a
life for myself unconsciously where my
creativity and this part that makes me
feel really alive is something that
isn't really accepted or encouraged
inside of my life as it stands and what
environments might I want to go start
engaging with where creativity is
actually really celebrated and helps me
get ahead and the more I put myself in
those environments the more I realize
that keeping my creative impulses shame
bound is actually holding me back and it
actually serves me to give the world
more and more of what I'm naturally
excited about so this is the type of
self-improvement that allows us to bring
more of our authentic selves into the
world rather than less and this is a
long process it might be that the first
time we go put ourselves in a room full
of creatives we have a lot of contempt
and disgust come up and anger how dare
they be expressing themselves creatively
and this might be something we have to
work through by doing Shadow work on
ourselves or we might have to refine and
get really clear on what type of
creativity do I feel proud of and want
to express myself through maybe the way
that these people are expressing
themselves just doesn't work for me but
I can keep exploring different
environments until I find one that I
feel really excited to be a part of so
this is an exploration of the ways in
which we could develop our ego to
reflect more of our authentic selves and
to grow in a direction where we are
bringing more of our authenticity into
the world through exploring different
Avenues or contexts for self-development
third thing we want to be watching for
as we're developing our sense of dignity
as we get more present and Associated to
our lives as they are in the present
what we also start to notice is ways in
which our beliefs become self-fulfilling
prophecies and we're going to talk a lot
more about this particularly around
perfectionism as this month goes on but
for example I might have this belief
that I'm just an unattractive person and
nobody would ever want to get close to
me because of that and then what I might
do is go out and just try to act in a
way that is totally inauthentic to me
and that might come across as really in
congruent to other people and they might
just get kind of weird vibes from me and
weird energy and so they're not going to
feel attracted to me because I'm an
uncomfortable person to be around
energetically and that's just going to
reinforce my belief I knew it I have to
double down on being my fake self
because everybody seems uncomfortable
and repelled by me when in reality the
reason I might be repelling people is
because I am hiding so much of myself
and people can sense that and it makes
them uncomfortable and if I were just to
relax and learn to be more comfortable
with myself and who I authentically am
people might feel a lot more comfortable
in my presence which might lead to much
deeper connections romantically
platonically on every level but in order
to really notice how people are
responding to us and why we have to be
not afraid of the present moment because
all of the feedback we get from other
people especially all of the nuanced
feedback happens in the present moment
so again the more we've gotten
comfortable and learned to respect
ourselves the more we're going to be
able to stay attuned to other people in
the world around us in the present which
gives us extremely valuable information
about what changes we might actually
need to make in order to get more of
what we authentically want out of life
and less of what we don't as well as how
we can stop accidentally bringing more
shame into our world by acting
inauthentically in ways that leads to
rejection and essentially where this all
leads us to at the end of the day is
that associating to our present selves
and having dignity for who we are in the
present allows us to find holistic rotes
to
self-improvement so as we're figuring
out who we are and which environments
we're going to be able to exist the most
authentically within and actually
celebrate and build upon on the parts of
ourselves that maybe we've spent our
entire lives hiding we're also going to
learn how to treat ourselves well in the
process of developing new skills which
again means we make consistent progress
towards them because we aren't berating
ourselves and judging ourselves and
tossing ourselves off of our own team
the second we make a mistake we're using
all the skills we built in that self-
neutrality process to ask ourselves
questions like oh if I made a mistake or
if I'm feeling really overwhelmed right
now why might that be what might I be
needing that I'm not getting right now
and how can I potentially pause give
myself that thing and then keep going
once I feel more energized we're going
to forgive ourselves more easily for
making mistakes because we're going to
understand the context of why we made
that mistake and how we can potentially
avoid it in the future or simply accept
that we can't get things right 100% of
the time and that's an unrealistic
expectation to hold ourselves to
so now instead of going into a shame
spiral and getting horribly off track
with our goals we can just keep going at
the end of the day the first step
towards healing from toxic shame means
dropping the Redemption fantasy of some
future where the person you are right
now with all of the feelings that the
person you are right now has does not
exist and you are some idealized version
of yourself and instead understanding
that what true healing looks like is
being the version of yourself you
currently hate without hating them okay
so the thing you want to change first is
not your external environment and your
external conditions it's the part of
yourself that hates you for being in
those conditions when we learn to
respect ourselves and have dignity for
ourselves at the bottom of the well it
gives us the strength to start climbing
out of it and eventually we can build a
life that exists in the sunlight not
because we have traded ourselves in for
this fantasy version of ourselves at the
top of the well but because we have
brought the person we were at the bottom
of the well out into the sunlight and
let them know it's okay to live there
it's okay to be me in the world there's
nothing fundamentally broken bad or
wrong with me I can come back from
mistakes I can treat myself with dignity
and I can treat other people with
dignity and respect and this person the
one who was at the bottom of the well is
also allowed to live a long happy life
outside of it all right that's all I
have to say for today on this topic as
always let me know in the comments what
you guys are thinking feeling any
questions that you have as you go
through this video and if there are any
particular topics you would love to see
covered during self-esteem month please
let me know and I will see what I can do
as always I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really
[Music]
soon