hey guys i'm heidi preeb and today i'm
making a video that i've been wanting to
make for a really long time because in
my videos lately i have been
recommending therapy left right and
center which is a little bit ironic for
me because for the first 29 years of my
life so until this past year of my life
i found almost no value in therapy
whatsoever i had tried out therapy four
different times i think over the course
of my life and i had never found it
effective because i was not in the place
where i was able to engage honestly and
transparently with a therapist now that
is definitely not the only barrier to
entry with therapy though for a lot of
people therapy is actually completely
inaccessible if you don't have some sort
of insurance that covers it it can be
extraordinarily expensive to find a good
therapist and it's also worth
acknowledging that even if you do have
therapy provided to you through your
insurance or through your work whatever
it is you might be limited in terms of
which therapists are available to you
and you might not be able to find
someone who either specializes in what
you're struggling with or who you have
rapport with i'm going to make a
follow-up video to this one that talks
about how to find the right therapist
but that process might be difficult if
you're limited in terms of which
therapists are able to go see so this
video is for both the people who cannot
access therapy because there are real
tangible barriers to it or those who
can't access therapy because mentally or
emotionally you're not ready to do that
yet and i actually think that's
something that we don't talk enough
about like i love that therapy is now
normalized and everyone's answer to
everything is go to therapy see a
therapist and that's great but there are
also certain mental health challenges
you might be having that make it
difficult for you to open up in therapy
and to engage honestly in therapy or to
even know what to talk about in therapy
right like if you're avoidantly attached
your sensitivities have been hidden from
you for so long that you might sit in
the therapy room and just be like i feel
fine i'm having problems but i don't
really know how to connect them and
therapists can be good but they cannot
be miracle workers we have to be ready
to engage in therapy before it's going
to work for us but that doesn't mean
that in the meantime we can't work
ourselves towards a place where we can
be ready to be open and transparent and
vulnerable and honest in a therapy room
and it also doesn't mean that if therapy
is never available to us we're never
going to be able to get better i have
what i am convinced is the best
therapist who is currently out there
practicing therapy and yet
if you told me i could only have either
my therapist or the next three things
that i'm going to recommend in this
video i would pick the three things in
this video because the things in this
video are what sustains mental health
yes there's an element to healing within
therapy but the work that you do outside
of it is what really matters on a
day-to-day basis so today we're going to
talk about what kind of things you can
do outside of the therapy room even if
you're never inside of it in order to
start working on your mental health in a
proactive way so last thing i'm going to
say before we get started is i want to
read you guys a quote from pete walker
who i at this point just bring up once a
youtube video he specializes in complex
ptsd and he wrote about his own therapy
journey in a way that i found incredibly
relatable and i think some of you guys
might too especially if you either have
an avoidant element to your attachment
style or if you have complex ptsd or any
other condition that can cause you to
mistrust authority figures and adults
he wrote in his book it was not until
later in life after i had quite a few
years of group and individual therapy
that i realized my journey of recovering
had actually begun decades before my
formal therapy it began with all the
therapeutic reading and writing i had
instinctively gravitated toward i
unconsciously sought the help of others
in the many spiritual and psychological
self-help books that i was intuitively
drawn to
without really understanding it i gained
valuable insights about how to improve
the way i treated myself and others just
as importantly i subliminally realized
that there were a number of good
safe wise and helpful adults out there
who could be trusted and who had a great
deal of wise and kind guidance to offer
over time the authors in my community of
books seemed like a small tribe of
elders who i imagined as people who
would have empathy for me if i were to
meet them
eventually when i achieved something of
a critical mass of this awareness i
managed to take a frightening leap into
the water of therapy i lucked out and
got a good enough therapist to help me
take steps in my healing that i could
not manage on my own
so if you are in this place that pete
walker is talking about here and this is
a place i have very much been in in my
life it might take you a lot of time a
lot of external resources a lot of self
work to get to the place where you're
able to have faith and trust in the
competence of others and the willingness
of others to help you and it's okay to
take your time on that journey in the
meantime or if that's never possible
let's talk about what you can do piece
of advice number one is
read
everything you can get your hands on get
a library card go to your local library
and see how many books you can find on
the topic that you are struggling with
so whether that's attachment style
trauma specific symptoms you might be
facing like substance abuse or eating
disorders or challenges in your
relationship find every resource you can
find on that challenge and load up your
brain with the information if you can
read a lot of different things on each
topic because you're going to get
radically different perspectives some
will resonate and some will not now i
want to acknowledge that a lot of people
who grew up with trauma of any sort with
attachment wounds of any sort with
complex ptsd or other disorders that
really impacted your development you
might have trouble with attention and
keeping yourself physiologically calm
and stable enough to be able to take in
wide amounts of information and if
that's you i really recommend trying
audiobooks for reading so when i
personally am feeling disregulated and i
find it's hard to hold my attention on a
book i will go for a walk and listen to
audio books and that'll often help the
information kind of seep into my brain
in a different medium that i find a lot
more soothing and i found that this
works for a lot of people who struggle
with inattention for whatever reason so
there is an app you can get called libby
if you're in north america i don't know
if it works elsewhere but it allows you
to rent out audio books from the library
like you would any book and you can put
it on two times speed i was reading the
other day that people who listen to
podcast audio books anything like that
faster actually retain more information
because it forces you to concentrate
harder so a book that might take you
like a week to read you could get done
in a two-hour walk if you're listening
to it on two-time speed and the book
isn't that long so it's a really great
way to consume a lot of information
about the challenges that you're facing
really quickly and whether or not you're
in therapy reading a ton of supplemental
material if you can is just a fantastic
thing to do because you have like the
greatest minds on the planet the most
brilliant psychologists who have ever
walked the face of the earth have
condensed their thoughts
after like 50 years of studying and
researching and working with clients
into a book that you can read in one
afternoon if you want to and people are
not taking advantage of this it's insane
like i have learned more from books in
my life than absolutely anything else
any relationship i've ever had any
therapy i've ever done any
self-development seminar or situation
i've ever put myself in no books have
taught me more than anything period
point blank everything else is like
micro dosing on knowledge and healing
work books are just such a rich and
concentrated resource and the more you
read the more you understand about your
own mind the more you can start
recognizing your own patterning and then
the more you're able to start catching
yourself in those patterns and finding
ways to break them now finding the right
books is a whole other adventure at the
end of this year i am going to make a
roundup of the 10 best books that i read
this year but i always end up throwing
like 15 of them in there
and a lot of them were attachment or
healing focus so if you're looking for
some recommendations watch out for that
video later this month but i really
believe with just going with your gut
with books your brain kind of knows what
you need so if you're finding yourself
drawn to a particular book go with that
it probably has some answer that you're
looking for okay piece of advice number
two you've probably heard this a
thousand times but i cannot emphasize it
enough
exercise daily exercise preferably
getting outside to exercise if you can
because you also need vitamin d from the
sun and this is one of those pieces of
advice where we all know it we've all
read the studies on how effective
exercise is on mental health but we're
all very quick to forget it myself
included so this fall i went on a giant
hiking trip came home started school and
basically did not leave my apartment for
like two weeks because i was just
exhausted from doing school and work
full-time and i became extremely
depressed within the course of like two
weeks just because i had stopped
exercising daily and i'd stopped going
outside daily and those two things had
such a profound impact on my mental
health within such a short period of
time that i cannot imagine what doing
that for like four months would look
like there's a book called the upward
spiral by alex corb which i really
recommend by the way if you cannot
afford therapy if you're not able to go
to therapy but you're feeling depressed
or anxious and you need some resources
for working through what you can do on a
day-to-day basis to help you kind of
balance out your mental health the
upward spiral is a wonderful book that
talks about tiny habits and little
things you can do in your life to start
combating depression and they give a
wonderful detailed overview of exactly
what ssris do to your brain and exactly
what exercise and being outside does to
your brain and there are many
similarities between the effects of
those two things and i think that
exercise is one that people find really
intimidating because a lot of us have
this kind of all or nothing attitude
about exercise right like we think i
have to be at the gym for three hours a
day bodybuilding or i have to be doing
no exercise and the reason we think of
it that way is because we have forgotten
that the point of exercise is not to get
buff and look a certain way it is
literally just that our bodies were
designed for movement and if we don't
give our bodies that movement it's going
to start impacting our mental health i
remember hearing about a conversation
that a friend of mine had with a
therapist one time and this therapist
had been practicing for 40 years and my
friend asked this therapist if you were
to give only one piece of advice to
people what would it be and the
therapist said go for a walk every
single day that will have more of an
impact on your mental health over the
course of your life than you could
possibly imagine and she was like if i
only had five minutes with every client
that is the number one piece of advice i
would give them go for a walk every day
now this obviously is not meant to
minimize the fact that you might have
very major mental health issues going on
that a walk will not fix this is not a
fix for your mental health but this is
about elevating your brain to the level
where it's able to cope with the other
things a little bit better and movement
and feeling in tune with your body is a
massive component of that okay massive
piece of advice number three if therapy
is inaccessible to you for whatever
reason is join a 12-step support group
so
i cannot believe that i did not know for
28 years of my life that 12 step groups
were not just for alcohol and drug abuse
they have 12 step groups for everything
i'm actually going to go online and read
you a list of all of the 12 step groups
that they have here we go alcoholics
anonymous everyone knows about that one
adult children of alcoholics for those
who are raised in alcoholic and other
dysfunctional families fantastic
resource i highly recommend that one if
you grew up in any sort of family
dysfunction it does not have to be an
alcoholic family whatsoever it can be a
family where alcohol was never used at
all but that program in particular deals
with re-parenting it talks about the
family roles it is such a good resource
i cannot recommend it enough alanon
for friends and families of alcoholics
cocaine anonymous clutterers anonymous
crystal meth anonymous cohenon for
friends and family of cocaine addicts
codependence anonymous another fantastic
resource for anyone dealing with any
sort of interpersonal trauma so
attachment wounding in particular cosa a
friends and family group associated with
sex addicts anonymous debtors anonymous
emotions anonymous for recovery from
mental and emotional illness eating
disorders anonymous families anonymous
for relatives and friends of addicts
food addicts and recovery anonymous food
addicts anonymous gamblers anonymous
heroin anonymous love addicts anonymous
marijuana anonymous narcotics anonymous
neurotics anonymous for recovery from
mental and emotional illness of any sort
nicotine anonymous overeaters anonymous
obsessive skin pickers anonymous pills
anonymous for recovery from prescription
pill addiction racists anonymous
sexaholics anonymous sex addicts
anonymous sexual compulsives anonymous
survivors of incest anonymous sex and
love addict anonymous sexual recovery
anonymous under earners anonymous
workaholics anonymous so there is a
12-step group out there for almost any
issue that you could possibly be facing
and at this point in time almost all of
them are online so you can tune in from
anywhere they are completely free and
they provide you with both a structure
for working through the program they
give you 12 steps to work through over
the course of a year or however long it
takes you they provide you with a
community of people you can work with
and they give you an open space to
practice sharing with other people and
showing up honestly in relationships
maybe for the first time a lot of people
are turned off from 12-step programs
because they think that it means you
have to give your life over to jesus and
if you are an atheist or if you are
someone who has struggled with religious
abuse of any sort that can feel very
intimidating i can guarantee you as
someone who has gone to many of these
groups that you absolutely do not ever
have to accept any particular theology
at all you do not have to start
believing in god i have worked through
many of the higher power related steps
and i do not believe in a christian god
and while you certainly can have 12-step
groups that are unhealthy i don't want
to discount the fact that not every
group functions the same way and you
might end up in the wrong group the
brilliance of the internet and the
brilliance of so many of these meetings
being online now is that you can try out
different groups to figure out what fits
for you so you can go online and you can
even search for specialized groups so
12-step groups that are focused on the
issue that you want to focus on but that
are comprised of completely atheists or
groups that are women only or men only
or non-binary only so there is an
incredible amount of selection you can
do here in finding a group and i really
recommend if these are groups that you
want to start taking advantage of you do
go to like five or six meetings and
figure out which group you jive with the
best because it's really important but
again that resource is completely free
it gives you a community it gives you a
structure for working through whatever
problem you're working through and it
gives you so much support along the way
so even if you can afford therapy i
always recommend that if you're looking
for a little bit of extra support and
you're looking for community to help you
work through these problems 12-step
groups can be phenomenal resources for
that in an ideal world you would combine
all of these things with therapy and
that's how you get massive results but
do not despair if therapy does not work
for you if you cannot find a therapist
if you cannot afford a therapist there
are so many routes to getting better and
i truly believe from the bottom of my
heart that if you are truly down to your
core motivated to get better nothing
will stop you there is so much out there
that you can find and learn from even
just looking at youtube videos there are
so many amazing amazing psychologists
self-help professionals out there who
have massive libraries of free material
on youtube and i have learned so much
that way personally you can also take
online courses a lot of them are the
cost of one therapy session but they
have condensed someone's entire
knowledge base and experience into a
course that you can take sometimes over
a couple of hours and that's also
something that i have personally hugely
benefited from in my own healing process
when i started working on my attachment
style i only took courses and watched
youtube videos for the longest time and
then i started reading every book on
earth and then i decided to take a
masters in attachment theory so it kind
of snowballed but it started with a
couple of youtube videos on the topic
last thing i want to note if you
recognize that you have problems that
you want to work through but you're
coming up against some sort of internal
resistance there can actually be parts
of our psychology that try to block us
from getting better because we think
that if we get better maybe we're going
to lose a relationship maybe we're going
to stop getting help that we need there
can be mental barriers around getting
better for people and if that's the case
for you i really recommend the book how
we change and 10 reasons why we don't by
ross ellenhorn it really helped me bust
through a kind of wall in my own mind
when i hit a point where i was
recognizing that particularly in
relationships i in theory wanted to get
better but in practice wasn't actually
doing the hard work of doing it and i
couldn't figure out why so sometimes
even just contextualizing where our
resistance lies around changing can be
really helpful and help us kind of clear
the way to start doing more honest work
okay that's all i have to say for today
again i'm gonna make a follow-up video
coming soon about how to find a good
therapist if that is the next step for
you but in the meantime if you guys have
any awesome books videos resources that
you have found that have helped you
immensely in your own healing journey
please drop them in the comments i would
love for us to share resources because i
have learned so much personally through
resources that other people have shared
with me so please share anything that
you think might be relevant and let's
help each other get as much of the free
help as we possibly can because it is a
hard world out there and we need each
other's help to get through it okay i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and i will see you back
here again soon
[Music]
you