hey guys heidi prep here so this is a
video that i have been wanting to make
for so long for absolutely years and
years and years because this is a phrase
that i have googled probably like a
hundred times in my life and never once
found a satisfactory result and what i
mean by that is if you google anything
to the effect of am i the toxic person
do i have narcissistic traits how do i
improve if i realize that i am
emotionally abusive what you get is
about a million different results of
people just pointing the finger at other
people in their lives for being toxic
and manipulative and narcissistic and
the kind of prevailing theme among all
of this is that if any of those things
apply to you you are less than human you
do not have any route to getting better
there is no hope for you you should take
yourself out of the game entirely and
just stop engaging with people and i
really really believe that if you look
at the way we're defining toxic person
these days which largely just means
anyone who does something i don't like
anyone who does something that is
selfish anyone who prioritizes
themselves and their own needs above the
needs of other people the term toxic
person applies in some small part to
absolutely everyone who is alive okay if
you are alive you have behaved in a
toxic way you have behaved in a
narcissistic way in fact narcissism is a
healthy and necessary part of ego
development so if you did not engage in
a healthily narcissistic way as a young
child you probably did not grow into a
healthy adult you probably grew into an
adult with a few more than average
narcissistic traits and all that means
is that you don't necessarily know how
to ask for and give love in healthy ways
and guess what
same man
welcome to the club that is a large
large proportion of the population right
but it always feels easier to point out
the traits in other people that we don't
like to call other people narcissistic
and toxic it's a lot harder to look
ourselves in the eye and go oh i have
some toxic traits i have some unhealthy
coping mechanisms that have really
negative impacts on other people i have
some ways in which i don't know how to
ask for love healthily so i ask for it
unhealthily and sometimes that doesn't
go over so well for the people in my
life it takes a lot of self-awareness
and a lot of self-accountability to be
in the place where you are willing to
work on your own toxic manipulative
unhealthy behaviors instead of just
pointing the finger at everyone else so
if you have showed up here not because
you're planning to send this video to
someone else to prove to them that
they're the toxic manipulator but
because you actually truly want to take
a deep hard look at yourself and figure
out how you can begin behaving in a more
socially responsible way congratulations
man everyone probably needs to be here
but you actually are and you're actually
ready to start doing the work so first
thing i want you to do no matter how
much shame or self-loathing you're
feeling right now is congratulate
yourself on doing something that most
people never do and never want to do
which is take responsibility for your
bad behavior we all behave badly i am
making this video because i have behaved
so atrociously at so many points in my
life that i have repeatedly needed
resources for how to behave less
atrociously okay so we are all in this
together if you are here and you are
actually here to do the work humongous
congratulations to you okay that is a
very big step that most people die
without ever having gone anywhere near
they don't even begin this journey so
huge kudos to you now the first thing i
want to clear up here is what i mean
when i say toxic person i actually want
to abandon that language pretty quickly
again i don't love the term toxic toxic
implies that there is something
inherently
flawed broken damaged within you that
means when you interact with other
people you are going to corrupt them in
some way okay
that is not a thing
that is not
possible okay
there is no way that a human soul can be
damaged in such a way that your mere
existence and interaction with other
people corrodes them okay you are not a
dangerous chemical you are a human being
so you can relax a little bit your
existence is not inherently damaging and
toxic to other people but some of your
behaviors certainly might be harmful
towards other people but i loathe the
idea of calling anyone toxic right
because that wraps up your behaviors in
your identity and those things actually
must be separate in order for us to
start doing work on ourselves if we
believe that we are inherently broken
inherently flawed inherently unhealthy
and these are all things i've believed
about myself for most of my life we will
continue to behave in unhealthy ways in
order to match our self-concept right so
we have to start divorcing our behavior
from our essence our essence is who we
are as a human being and who we are as a
human being is very different from how
we act as a human being and what's
interesting about looking at it that way
is that it helps us understand the
difference between shame and guilt so
when we feel guilty what we are feeling
is i have done something bad my behavior
has been hurtful or harmful to someone
else when we're in a shame state we feel
like who i am is wrong my very essence
my identity the person that i am
is wrong and bad and flawed and maybe
should not exist
shame gets us nowhere when we are
operating from a shame-based state it's
very hard to be empathetic because the
focus is so intensely on ourselves and
the extraordinarily negative feeling
that we're feeling about ourselves when
we are in a guilt-based state we can say
i'm okay but my action was not okay so i
can choose different actions i can do
repair work in order to change the
outcome when we are in a shame-based
state all we can do is think about how
to relieve those feelings of shame and
make ourselves feel better about
ourselves because it's a human need to
kind of think of the self as good and
okay and loving and empathetic so we
will do anything when we're shrouded by
shame to restore our image of ourselves
including taking responsibility for
things that we didn't necessarily need
to take that much responsibility for
lying or manipulating other people to
cover up what we don't want them to find
out that we did punishing ourselves
through a range of unhealthy coping
mechanisms that actually end up driving
us deeper and deeper and deeper into
that sense of shame now what separates a
healthy person from what pop psychology
would call a toxic person is a healthy
person is not operating from shame
they're operating from guilt so if they
do something wrong they can recognize
i'm okay i'm not a bad person but i did
something bad so i can go do repair work
to fix it a toxic person would be
someone who is operating from shame and
from now on in this video i'm going to
call that a shame based person so there
is a psychologist named john bradshaw
i'm not sure if he actually coined this
or if someone else did
pete walker who deals a lot with complex
ptsd also talks a lot about shame-based
people it's also a common term in
attachment literature but what it means
to be shame-based is to believe that who
you are as a human being is inherently
flawed or broken in some way that
there's something wrong with you that if
anyone were to truly get to know you and
see you they would see how flawed and
broken you are and so you have to live
your life in this way that is
continuously kind of manipulating and
pushing away other people so that they
never see the real you because somewhere
deep in there you feel like if anyone
saw the real you they would not want
anything to do with you okay and this is
a very sad way to live anyone who is
insecurely attached so on this channel
we talk a lot about attachment styles
and if you're insecurely attached it
means you're either anxious avoidant or
fearful avoidant those are all
shame-based identities it means that
early on in life you internalize this
idea that something was deeply wrong or
flawed or broken within you and that
idea was wrong okay you are not the
exception to this rule you are not the
only person on earth who truly is deeply
shameful and flawed and broken okay
every person comes into this world with
the need to be loved and if you are not
loved in a way that allows you to
understand the goodness and the empathy
within you you're going to develop this
deep sense of shame right but that sense
of shame is not a true indicator of who
you are okay
you are a person who is just as capable
of doing right by others as anyone else
it just might take you a little bit more
time to get there and get the behavior
sorted out if you are shame-based
because you have spent your entire life
operating from this place of shame and
trying to cover up who you truly are and
trying to keep people just far away
enough from you so that they don't
realize how messed up you are and that
leads to a lot of really bad behaviors a
lot of behaviors that other people are
probably gonna point at and go you're
being toxic okay and this is not a get
out of jail free card it doesn't mean
that because you are shame-based
everything you do is okay very very far
from that but behaving badly does not
mean that you are a worthless or
inherently flawed and unredeemable human
being it just means that early on you
internalize some stuff that gave you
some very maladaptive coping patterns
those coping patterns can be worked on
and they can be changed i've been
working on and trying to change my own
24 hours a day for years now and you
know what it does get better and there
can be very very real progress but the
first step is kind of doing away with
this idea that already feels very true
to you which is that human beings can be
flawed broken toxic inherently corrupt
and bad and that that badness is gonna
spill over and corrupt everyone around
them that is not a thing okay you your
essence who you were when you were born
into this world which still lives inside
of you is not broken flawed bad or
corrupt okay there are just some
behaviors that you learned that hurt you
that hurt other people and that you can
unlearn and that is what we're going to
talk about for the rest of this video is
how to take yourself out of that
shame-based state separate your
behaviors from your essence and learn to
start behaving better because you can it
is so completely possible but absolutely
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this notion that you are an
irredeemable toxic person or narcissist
you are a human being having a human
experience we're here to talk about how
to have that human experience better and
y'all there is nothing more narcissistic
than a person who cannot admit that they
have any narcissistic qualities okay a
person who thinks that they are not in
any way the problem and that everyone
else is the toxic narcissistic
gaslighting abuser is almost definitely
the person with the least self-awareness
in the room and therefore the person who
is going to perpetuate this bad behavior
over and over may be in just more covert
or subtle ways so step one in this
process is doing away with the term
toxic person don't think of yourself as
toxic and terrible and bad because then
all you're gonna do is more toxic and
terrible and manipulative stuff to try
to get everyone else to not realize that
that's who you are okay you have to be
willing to accept the idea that maybe
you're an okay person you're doing the
best you can you just need some better
coping mechanisms and that leads me to
my second point which is don't let the
pendulum swing too far in one direction
so when we start to become aware of our
own bad behaviors our controlling
behaviors our manipulative behaviors our
our unkind or self-centered behaviors it
can be really easy to go oh my god
everything i do is wrong and everything
that everyone else does around me must
be compassionate and kind and loving
especially if you are a shame-based
person you probably think in a lot of
black and whites right so the problem
must be either you or someone else and
nothing in between but 99 of the time i
would say anytime there is an unhealthy
relationship happening it is because
both people within that relationship are
unhealthy in some capacity okay healthy
people securely attached people people
who do not think of themselves as
inherently shameful don't have that hard
of a time walking away from unhealthy
people they can kind of separate
naturally this is that person's issue
this is my issue if they're blaming me
for something that doesn't really feel
like it's my fault i can just
kind of clock out and let them deal with
their own stuff
if you are insecurely attached there is
this kind of constant
struggle in your head of whose fault is
what so i spent almost a decade in this
one relationship where both of us were
insecurely attached and i could not for
the life of me figure out who is the
toxic person here okay one day it was me
the next day it was my partner one month
i thought like i need to go live off in
the forest because i am such a terrible
and controlling and emotionally abusive
person and the next month i was like
wait wait no i'm mother teresa and it's
my partner who's doing all these toxic
and manipulative behaviors and nothing
ever got better until i realized the
answer is both of us both of us are
doing a lot of terrible and unhealthy
behaviors both of us are interacting in
this way that is creating this downward
spiral right and sometimes one person's
behaviors are more overt than the others
right so often you'll have this kind of
anxious and avoidant dance where one
person is a lot more overtly controlling
and the other is a lot more covertly
controlling so maybe they play the
victim all the time or they pretend that
everything they do is so virtuous and
right but really they're doing a whole
bunch of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that they're refusing
to take any responsibility for okay so
there's a million different faces and
roles that we can all play in our
relationships but at the end of the day
if you have a healthy relationship with
yourself you are probably not spending a
lot of time engaging with unhealthy
people if you have an unhealthy
relationship with yourself you're
probably spending most of your time
engaging with other unhealthy people and
in that case the game of who is at fault
here will go on to eternity because
probably
both of you are at fault you probably
have complementary faults okay so maybe
one person is very overtly demanding the
other person is very avoidant and evades
responsibility for everything and that
can get you into this kind of death
cycle right and you need to stop trying
to figure out who is the narcissist who
is the abuser who is the toxic person
probably both of you are playing a very
large role okay but the only person you
can control in this game is yourself so
changing your own behavior at some point
down the line is probably going to lead
to you setting a lot of boundaries that
were not previously there around the
other people in your life and that's
okay and that isn't the first step that
is like 10 steps down the road but the
first step is just
stopping the game of whose fault is this
do not play it anymore in your mind only
look at your role and how you can start
showing up differently because that's
the absolute only thing that you have
control over okay so step one don't
think of yourself as toxic and bad and
shameful as a human being
be willing to separate your identity
from your behavior
step two stop trying to figure out who
else is toxic and manipulative and a
narcissist okay just focus on your own
behavior and how you can start to change
it and step three is the most important
step which is very consciously putting
your focus on doing that so you need to
put yourself under observation okay and
i recommend that this period of
observation last for literally years
okay spend as much time as you can in
your life in observer mode without
judgment and this is a lot easier said
than done because the more aware we
become of our own bad behavior the more
we also want to judge ourselves for it
and the more we want to change it and
fix it right away but i actually really
really encourage you to take some
pressure off yourself and instead of
telling yourself i'm never going to do
anything wrong ever again i'm never
going to behave badly ever again i'm
never going to try to control or
manipulate or be unkind towards someone
ever again become
very good at taking a step back and
observing when you're doing that and why
so get curious about your own motives
the way you would get curious about
someone else's right so many people love
like serial killer documentaries right
like they love figuring out why do these
super evil and twisted people do super
evil and twisted things but nobody wants
to sit with themselves and get curious
about why they do small-scale evil and
twisted things right and i think that's
just a giant projection like we are
curious about that we are curious about
like the badlands of the human psyche
but it's so difficult to see it in
ourselves so we have to get curious
about it in other people but i am
encouraging you to approach your own
mind with the fascination and awe that
you might feel watching a documentary
about a serial killer okay figure out
what your motives are figure out where
you are hurting people because you are
hurt so the next time you feel yourself
getting triggered just take a step back
mentally and be very very aware of
what's going on for you be willing to
slow that moment down and ask yourself
what is going on in my body what's
happening in my physiology that is
different from how my physiology is
usually wired what thoughts am i having
that are different from thoughts that i
normally have how can i reverse engineer
this trigger so that i notice it as a
trigger and not as a rational response
to my situation and sometimes you have
to do this in retrospect so a lot of us
who have any sort of anger issues any
sort of attachment issues we know the
feeling of being in conflict and
thinking at the time this is completely
rational i'm totally right i deserve to
have this fight i deserve to win it i
deserve to behave however i need to
behave in order to get through it and
get my point across and then a day later
we're like oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that's not how i
should have behaved right even though my
point may have been valid the way i went
about it was not appropriate okay
sometimes we don't have the
self-awareness to do this in the moment
and that's fine you can do this the next
day you can sit down with yourself and
go what triggered me to go into that
kind of spiral where suddenly i believed
that anything i said or did was
justified what was that moment what pain
point got hit what trigger went off in
me that allowed me to then justify
anything i said or did after that point
and more importantly what feeling was
present in my body what thoughts were
present in my mind how might i be able
to tell in concrete terms in the future
that i am triggered because that is an
absolute art form is being able to
recognize in the moment i'm triggered
i'm not operating from my normal
physiological or mental state and i need
to take a step back okay that's a really
hard thing to do but it's a very very
necessary thing to do if we want to
start behaving more appropriately and to
get to that point we have to get really
clear on when we are triggered when we
know we cannot trust our own intuition
and our own thoughts at this time and it
also really helps to figure out what
tends to bring us to that place so the
more time we can spend observing
ourselves observing what triggers us
observing exactly when that moment
happens in our psyche when we give
ourselves permission to do or say
something we normally would not do or
say
helps us to prevent it from happening in
the future and to give a kind of cheat
sheet the thought that tends to
accompany a trigger is usually something
along the lines of this time is
different you know like every other time
that i've picked a fight or gotten
controlling or been over the line it has
been unjustified but this time i'm right
this time i can go to town right and
that feeling of oh i finally found the
time when my self-righteousness is
justified is unfortunately ironically
often the exact thought that can cause
us to recognize oh i'm triggered oh
maybe this time is not the time and it's
hard to do that in a moment because it
means actually distrusting our own
perception okay and that's a really hard
thing to do when your body is in fight
or flight mode all of the thoughts that
come up to you that are either fight
flight freeze or fawn feel extremely
important extremely imminent and
extremely rational and to be able to
take a beat in those moments and go
maybe this is not the most rational
possible response or even if it's
rational maybe it's not the most
effective possible response is like
expert level mindfulness skills okay it
is really
really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hard to do that and
that's why so few people do and so few
people end up in a place where they're
asking themselves how to become a less
toxic or manipulative person in the
first place is because we always believe
in the moment that our actions are
justified and here is something that i
think a lot of people do not acknowledge
nearly enough
sometimes your actions are justified
most people have been in situations
where they are genuinely being treated
horribly and where flying off the handle
is actually a kind of reasonable
reaction however it is not necessarily
the most effective reaction because when
we have two unhealthy shame-based people
who are continuously flying off the
handle at each other that becomes a
toxic death spiral okay
someone has to be willing to break that
chain even if they are justified in
giving an angry impassioned controlling
manipulative response okay and this does
not mean becoming a doormat it does not
mean admitting fault when you are not at
fault for something it does not mean
having no boundaries around someone
else's bad behaviors actually it means
the opposite it means learning for the
first time how to set appropriate
boundaries because often when we are out
here trying to control manipulate other
people that's not boundary setting that
is enmeshment right that is telling
ourselves and other people i won't be
okay until you start behaving
differently and that is always a recipe
for disaster that is the absolute
opposite of having boundaries okay
boundaries mean i am okay over here and
if you are not okay over there i'm gonna
put some barriers between us to make
sure that i stay okay if we believe that
we will not be okay until someone else
starts treating us differently we are in
a disempowered state and we are
continuing a toxic cycle okay so step
four of this process after becoming
extremely aware of when you are
triggered is learning to set self
boundaries around your triggers so what
i mean by this is you are not yet going
to be worrying about the boundaries that
you're setting with other people okay
that's going to come as a natural
extension of this step what you're going
to do at this step is set boundaries for
yourself with yourself
and what that means is when you realize
that you are triggered so when you have
that feeling of either body on fire or
body shutting down or body wanting to
people please and give other people
everything they want at the expense of
what you need to keep yourself okay then
you're going to learn to take a beat
step back from the situation and tell
yourself because i am triggered i'm not
going to engage right now it doesn't
matter if you're right you might be
right the other person might be behaving
horribly like an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in a way that
is unacceptable doesn't matter because
you are triggered you need to disengage
and that is a boundary you need to have
with yourself okay it's a promise you
need to make with yourself every time
that i realize i'm triggered i'm in
fight or flight mode i need to take
myself out of the situation and put
myself in an emotionally and physically
safe situation and again you need to
prepare for what this is going to feel
like in a non-idealized way so don't
tell yourself you're going to go into
every argument and be very clear on when
you're triggered right realize that
you're gonna have to fight with yourself
a little bit here your psychology is
gonna be telling you no no this time
your anger is justified this time your
want and your need to control someone
else's behavior is justified no you have
to learn to recognize those thoughts as
the evidence that you're triggered and
be willing to tell yourself even though
i feel so justified right now i made a
promise to myself a absolute promise to
myself that is more important than this
situation with the other person that
when i'm having these thoughts when my
body is feeling this wired i am going to
go and disengage with a situation just
in case i happen to be triggered and if
i am wrong and if in five days from now
i still feel the exact same way maybe i
can revisit that situation but on the
off chance i'm operating on a trigger
right now i am going to remove myself
and find a way to calm myself down
before i return to this conversation
something that my therapist talks to me
a lot about is doing a cold attack when
you're angry so instead of allowing your
anger to just overwhelm you and take
over the situation if someone is truly
mistreating you you need to figure out a
strategy when you are cooled down for
dismantling that manipulation okay for
dismantling that person's role in your
life but it's really hard to do that
when you are in the moment and you are
full of rage you are going to behave in
a messy way in those moments you just
are the critical thinking skills that
you need in order to effectively solve
the situation long term are offline in
those moments you could take an eeg scan
of your brain and see that that frontal
lobe is not functioning the way that
it's supposed to function and that
frontal lobe functioning is what you
need to solve complex long-term problems
like unhealthy relationship behaviors
okay so being willing to not engage when
you are triggered is going to be the
first step
in you actually being able to fix these
problems which leads me to point number
five which is that you have to be
willing to behave well even when you
have an excuse to behave badly okay
because this is the thing that allows
everyone out there to believe that they
are not the toxic person they believe
that if someone is mistreating me then i
am allowed to respond in as controlling
and terrible and angry and manipulative
of a way as i see fit and i guarantee
you i guarantee you in your life there
will be situations where someone will
truly be behaving badly towards you okay
and if you are willing to adhere to
yourself boundary in that situation
remove yourself from it and choose the
high road even though you have an excuse
to choose the low road a justifiable
excuse
that
is when you stop becoming part of the
problem
okay
that is how you truly take yourself out
of this game that so few people are
willing to take themselves out of and
you actually take the first steps
towards becoming an emotionally healthy
and mature person the moments in which
you have every excuse to freak out to
control to manipulate to fly off the
handle in rage and you choose not to you
choose to take a step back you choose to
put yourself in a situation where you
are emotionally healthy safe and okay
whether that means going over to see a
friend whether that means taking a loan
time whether that means shutting down a
conversation and setting some boundaries
between you and the other person where
you tell them i will return to this
conversation in 24 hours or 48 hours or
whatever it is once i've had time to
think about it properly and it's really
really helpful to work with a therapist
through this to figure out what you need
to do to cool yourself down once you've
removed yourself from a situation
because if you think that the other
person has to change before you're gonna
feel okay you will never get out of
those toxic cycles ever you will stay
stuck in them for your entire life i
promise you this
you need to learn how to make yourself
feel okay after you've removed yourself
from a situation without the other
person's help in order to restore
yourself to equilibrium and then return
to that conversation from a cooled down
place okay and sometimes you don't need
to return to the conversation sometimes
if someone truly is behaving badly you
can just leave that situation alone you
can just let that person know i don't
want to engage with you anymore a lot of
the time when we're behaving toxically
or manipulatively or narcissistically
it's because we want something from the
other person that we don't know how to
give to ourselves so this final step is
about recognizing that it is always our
responsibility to learn how to get those
feelings of validation and self-worth
from ourselves and we're gonna need help
we're probably gonna need help from a
therapist from loving friends or family
members from support groups from books
from
any resource we can find including
resources like this typing things into
the internet and seeing what pops up
that help us to restore our self-concept
so that we are not shame-based and
operating out of what we believe to be
this broken part of ourselves but that
we can see ourselves as whole and
complete and well-meaning people who
just need some guidance
and there are so so many awesome
resources for this i really recommend
checking out the work of john bradshaw
of pete walker there are a ton of
psychologists who talk a lot about what
it means to bring yourself out of that
shame-based state and into a more secure
worldview where you feel like i am okay
i don't need to put myself in these
endless death spiral relationships where
i'm trying to get all of my self-worth
out of the other person okay to be
non-toxic just means to be someone who
can stand on their own and be okay and
who doesn't need to try to control other
people because that's not where they're
getting their self-worth from and that
is a hard
long road to walk down okay it is work
every single step of the way and it is
hard and humbling work but it is so so
worth it because there is not a single
feeling anyone else can give you i
promise you this that is better than the
feeling of liking who you are
of living in integrity with yourself and
your own morals and your own values and
knowing and being able to trust that the
way that you show up in the world is
going to be a reflection of yourself
that you are proud of and being willing
to confront those bad behaviors is the
first step in this and so you can
already congratulate yourself for taking
it and for having that desire to get
better and to think differently about
yourself and to allow that difference in
the way that you think about yourself to
radiate outwards into your relationships
with other people because it absolutely
will the more willing you are to be soft
and empathetic and loving towards
yourself the more capable you become of
being all of those things with other
people okay there's that saying we can
only meet other people as deeply as
we've met ourselves and that really
really applies here if you are having
toxic relationships with anybody else
it's always because you are having a
toxic relationship with yourself first
and you are reflecting that relationship
outward hurt people hurt people
healed people heal people okay and so if
you want to start doing better you need
to start taking the focus entirely off
other people place it back on yourself
figure out where these wounds are coming
from why they're being triggered where
they show up what it feels like in your
brain and your body when they show up
and how you can start reacting
differently in those moments and taking
that time that you would usually spend
fighting manipulating trying to get
something out of someone else to center
yourself
be aware of what's going on with
yourself and learning to fix that before
you engage outwardly again it's a long
road but it's a road that pretty much
everyone on earth should walk down
should be doing some work on because
being a social creature is a giant
responsibility and if you want to work
on how you're showing up as a social
creature in your environment congrats
you are already on the right path and i
am so so glad that you have found your
way here okay i think that's it for
today i think that's pretty much what i
have to say about this topic um i will
definitely have more related videos so
things that are maybe more specific and
actionable in terms of mindfulness
techniques you can use but i just wanted
to give a basic overview of what it kind
of feels like when you get to that place
where you realize oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] i'm a big
problem in a lot of my relationships and
why it's actually a really good thing to
end up there it's not a bad thing like
everyone has
behaviors that are bad everyone has
things they think about themselves that
are maladaptive but it's awesome if you
are willing to start checking those and
working in a different direction so
kudos to all you guys i love you um if
you want to talk more about
self-improvement you can go to
www.heidipreeb.com to check out more of
my stuff but until next time love you
all i hope you have an awesome week and
i will see you back here again soon
[Music]