hey guys heidi preeb here today i wanted
to introduce a system that if you're
following me on any other social media
platforms so
facebook twitter instagram
uh medium
you will already have heard me talking
about this system but i also wanted to
give a quick introduction to it on
youtube because i want to explore the
system more through a series of videos
so this system is called dysfunctional
family roles it's not technically a
personality system but it is a system
that explains a lot about our
personalities and what roles we take on
as we go through our lives so for all
intents and purposes i'm going to kind
of group it in with personality systems
but what this particular system really
plays on is your adapted self so family
therapists often talk about the
authentic self versus the adapted self
so your true self is the person that you
are underneath all of your social
conditioning and there is a large
philosophical debate we could have about
what the authentic self is you could
argue that there is no true core self
that at our essence we're all just kind
of channeling consciousness and
awareness but the point is we can all
agree that there is definitely something
called an adapted self which is the
traits that we learn to display and the
roles that we learn to take on in our
social environment in order to fit in
and get our needs met and we start
learning to do this at a very very young
age so from the time you are a toddler
you are learning kind of through
classical conditioning but then
eventually we internalize a lot of these
lessons that we learn
how to show up in the world and how to
ask for love attention connection in a
way that is most likely to give you what
you want in return so the very first
instance of this is a baby crying right
and learning that this gets my
caregiver's attention so when i need
something this is how i'm going to ask
for it and then as we grow up these
roles become more and more complex when
you're five years old you can't just cry
the same way a baby would cry and have
your needs met you're expected to use
your words but at the age of five just
as at the age of two and at the age of
17 a lot of us learn that certain words
certain ways that we show up certain
ways that we ask for things of other
people get us what we want more
effectively than other things and which
strategies work for us highly depends on
what kind of family we grew up in so the
social roles that we're going to be
talking about today were originally
identified by virginia satir who was the
mother of family therapy she was the
first person to go really really deep
into how a family functions like a
system and how each individual member
and what they bring to the family
impacts the whole and how that hole in
return impacts each individual member
which is just kind of a fancy way of
saying families are complex ecosystems
that are made up of many different
people and sometimes when a child is
born they are assigned a role by the
family based on what is missing from the
existing family unit and this is almost
never conscious on behalf of the parent
right they don't decide that this is who
they want to classically condition their
child to become in some cases maybe to
an extent that's at play but for the
most part through a subtle reward and
punishment system the parent conditions
the child to behave in certain ways
based on what the family needs at the
time of the child's birth now of course
it's kind of unavoidable that this will
happen who we are is shaped by the
people that raise us the home
environment that we're raised in and
that's not always a bad thing but
virginia satire originally began looking
at homes that include an alcoholic or an
addicted parent and this model
eventually expanded to include any sort
of family dysfunction so if you see
yourself in any of these roles but you
don't have an alcoholic or addicted
parent that doesn't necessarily
disqualify you any family in which the
family unit is operating to serve the
needs of a parent more so than the needs
of the children is qualified as a
dysfunctional family in this system and
there are a lot of different reasons why
a family might function that way one
could be that one or both of the parents
are alcoholics or addicts but another
reason could be that one or both parents
have untreated mental illnesses one or
both parents have unresolved attachment
issues that they're projecting onto
their child one or both parents has
trauma that they have not healed from or
found proper coping strategies to deal
with one or both parents could have an
addiction to something that we perceive
to be benign but that they are putting
above their child at every opportunity
so examples of this might be parents who
have work addictions parents who have
shopping addictions john bradshaw and
alice miller who are two of the most
influential psychologists in the family
therapy space talk a lot about religious
addiction in parents so parents who put
their religious beliefs or their
religious doctrines above the needs of
their children would qualify as a
dysfunctional family in this system so
any family unit that is operating not
primarily to meet the needs of the
children both physically and emotionally
but that is primarily concerned with
meeting the emotional needs of the
parent is considered a dysfunctional
family and the following roles are
likely to show up among the children
over the years a whole bunch of
different psychologists have contributed
to dysfunctional family roles so you can
find anywhere up to like 20 or 30
different roles out there and all of
them play important parts and it's
really worth exploring but today i want
to focus on the six most commonly
occurring family roles so the ones that
you see over and over and over again
regardless of whose book you're reading
or whose theory you're looking at over
the next couple weeks i'm going to do a
deep dive into the different attachment
styles and which family roles they tend
to take on but i wanted to make this
video to just quickly introduce the
different roles so that we're all on the
same page about what this system is
before we get started so again children
don't choose these roles parents
unconsciously choose these roles for the
children at the time of their birth and
then subtly reinforce the role through
what they reward and what they punish
over the course of the child's life now
at a certain point in the child's life
for most children their role becomes a
part of their identity so they don't
know that they're doing these things or
playing out these characteristics
because they're getting punished or
rewarded for it they start to think this
is just who i am this is just what i do
this is a part of my identity and
because these roles become internalized
children carry them on throughout their
life well into their own adulthood
without ever realizing that these are
their adapted selves it's not
necessarily their true wants and needs
and emotions it is who they had to
become
in order to fit the needs of their
family system so some children get to
adulthood and realize
this role doesn't fit me so much anymore
maybe it never really felt like it fit
me and maybe with the help of a
therapist they learn to abandon that
role and move more fully into who they
truly are but a lot of us unconsciously
cater to these roles our entire lives
and we're going to talk a lot more about
what that looks like as the week goes on
the roles we're going to talk about
today are the roles of the family hero
the family scapegoat the lost child the
mascot the caretaker or the enabler and
the golden child i'm just going to give
you a very brief overview today but
we're going to go much more deeply into
the main roles in the future so the hero
like any of the other dysfunctional
roles has a secret mission that they've
been tasked with at birth and this
mission is never overtly stated but
based on what their parents praise them
for and what they reject them for they
learn what their mission is and the
mission of the family hero is to
convince outsiders that they are a nice
normal family and the family hero does
this by being very achievement oriented
and excelling in some area that the
family system really values so these
children tend to become very
perfectionistic they tend to obsess over
making a mistake and feel extreme guilt
if they do make a mistake they may be
highly motivated in academics if that's
what the family values or they may be
highly motivated in sports if that's
what the family values or they may be
devoutly religious if that's what the
family values whatever it is that the
child perceives is going to make the
family look very good from the outside
they become extremely adept at so the
family hero helps out the family by
showing everyone who's watching look at
what a success i am look at what a nice
normal well-adjusted kid i am there
couldn't possibly be any dysfunction in
my family because i turned out so great
and this is the role that they subtly
carry on into adulthood so even as they
grow up the family hero often feels an
immense pressure to perform to do very
well at everything that they take on and
to not show any weakness or
vulnerability to the world they don't
want to invite any suspicion that
something might be going wrong inside of
the family unit and the family hero role
often correlates with avoidant
attachment which we're going to talk a
lot more about over the next couple
weeks the next family role is the role
of the family scapegoat so the secret
mission of the family scapegoat is to be
blamed for everything that goes wrong in
the family so from a very young age the
parents often project their own negative
qualities onto the scapegoated child so
that they don't have to look at the
faults within themselves so let's say
mommy or daddy has really bad rage
issues they'll pick one child to direct
the majority of those rage issues onto
and then tell the child mommy your daddy
gets angry because you're a bad kid in
the addicted family it might be mommy or
daddy drinks or uses because you're a
bad kid because you stress us out so
much and this is very confusing for the
young child because suddenly they're
only getting reinforced for their bad
behavior they get a lot of attention
even though it's negative attention when
they're behaving badly when they're
acting out when they're being blamed for
something and they scream back and start
a fight that's when they actually get
the most focused attention on them so
they are being subtly conditioned to
behave badly in order to get attention
from their parents and because children
are very intuitive creatures they
usually can't put words to it but they
can pick up on the fact that mommy or
daddy feels a little bit relieved after
they yell mommy or daddy feels a little
bit better once they've blamed the child
for being bad so this child will take on
being bad being a bad kid being a rotten
egg as their identity and this will
often follow them through life and they
will continuously act out continuously
seek out relationships where they are
being blamed shamed told that they are
at fault for someone's behavior because
this belief gets internalized in the
scapegoated child that they are bad and
they are the reason other people have
problems so very often the scapegoated
child has a fearful avoidant attachment
style it's a very disorienting
experience to be scapegoated because
there isn't really a way to predict
what's going to elicit anger from your
caregiver because it doesn't actually
follow any rhyme or reason in relation
to your behavior but you don't know that
if you're the scapegoat so a lot of
scapegoats also develop symptoms of
complex ptsd because they had a very
unstable and in some cases unpredictably
dangerous early home environment and
this is something that we're going to
talk more about later this week when we
talk about the fearful avoidance style
and scapegoat role the third common
family role is the role of the lost
child so the lost child learned to kind
of survive in their family environment
by keeping their head down and
pretending that nothing was going wrong
they may have noticed that when their
siblings acted out or spoke their mind
they were punished or rejected or blamed
and so the lost child tries to adapt to
the family unit by becoming whatever the
family unit wants and this doesn't
really allow the lost child to develop a
sense of identity for themselves that
they're able to confidently assert and
communicate and this feeling of identity
incompletion follows the lost child into
adulthood so this often correlates with
an anxious attachment style in which the
lost child when they grow up is
continuously searching for another
person to kind of complete them and give
them the guidance that they feel like
they never really got as a child so the
lost child may really struggle to trust
themselves and know what's best for them
even as an adult and they may
unconsciously spend the majority of
their lives seeking out a partner that
really functions as more of a caregiver
for them because they never really
learned who they were what they stood
for or what they had to give back to the
world they're constantly looking for
someone else to tell them or to help
them realize that and we're going to
talk a lot more about this later on in
the week when we talk about the anxious
attachment style and the lost child role
so at this point i want to highlight
that you can have more than one family
role so the three roles that we're going
to talk about next are sometimes
secondary roles you might have a child
who is the scapegoat but also has a
secondary role as the mascot you can
also have shifting roles so you might
have a child who is subtly reinforced to
one behavior at one point in time and
then a different behavior later on based
on the needs of the family system at the
time so the family system roles can
change when one child goes away to
college when there's some sort of major
upset in the family there are a lot of
different things that can impact these
roles but most children have one
dominant role one role that follows them
throughout the majority of their family
life and then maybe a couple of
secondary roles that they shift through
depending on the needs of the family
unit at the time so the third family
role we're going to talk about is the
role of the mascot the mascot is the
child who is constantly on high alert
for conflict that might arise in the
family and the mascot attempts to
diffuse this conflict through humor so
they might actually present as a very
easy-going laid-back fun-loving
personality but under the surface they
are governed by a consistent sense of
anxiety because they are always on the
lookout for conflict bubbling up in the
family unit because they believe that it
is their job to diffuse that conflict
through humor and this is likely going
to be the way that this child deals with
conflict all the way through to
adulthood so in their adult
relationships in their relationships
with their own children they might
really struggle to take emotions and
feelings seriously because they learn to
disconnect from their own emotions in
favor of lightening the mood and keeping
things on the surface where it felt safe
the next rule is the role of the
caretaker or the enabler now this might
be the spouse of someone who is addicted
or it might be one of the children who
has kind of stepped up to take a more
parental role within the family so you
often see this with an older child who
has younger siblings in the family
system who they kind of step up and
become a little bit of a parental figure
for if the actual parental figures in
the family are not capable of fulfilling
that role and this doesn't just mean
meeting the physical needs of their
younger siblings more likely it means
meeting their emotional needs so the
caretaker's role is to make sure that
any messes that get created within the
family system are cleaned up and if the
parent is not going to clean them up the
child who takes on the caretaker role
will so if one of the parents is an
alcoholic this child might make excuses
for them as to why they're not showing
up places if one of the parents is
scapegoating one of the children the
caretaker might step in to provide
guidance and emotional support for that
younger child
the caretaker might be taking care of
their younger siblings or the parent or
both so there's often a role reversal in
the case of the caretaker where they're
actually acting as a bit of a parent
figure for their own parent and this is
often a role that follows children well
into adulthood they are at high risk of
developing highly co-dependent
relationships where they constantly feel
as though they need to take
responsibility for cleaning up other
people's messes for making sure that
everyone else is emotionally taken care
of and the tricky thing about this role
is that the caretaker believes they're
doing the family a service by cleaning
up the messes but what they're actually
doing is enabling the family dysfunction
because if there is never anything to
call attention to the outside world that
the family unit is in trouble help will
never arrive so the caretaker believes
that they're keeping their family
together and they're keeping their
family unit strong and while it is true
that they're probably keeping them
together they're also lessening the
likelihood that someone on the outside
is going to notice the dysfunction
that's happening within the family and
get the children in that family the
support and care that they need and of
course the child does not know their
enabling right that is far beyond the
scope of what children are capable of
understanding it's far beyond the scope
of what a lot of adults are capable of
understanding right but this is the
accidental role that the caretaker
fulfills in the family is the role of
the enabler of the dysfunction the final
family role that we're going to talk
about is the role of the golden child
the golden child is kind of the inverse
dynamic of the scapegoat so the
scapegoated child is the child who the
parent projects all of their own
negative qualities onto so that they
don't have to take responsibility for
them the golden child is the child who
the parent projects all of their
positive characteristics onto so this
child is often blatantly favored by the
parent they may not say so but it's
often evident to everyone in the family
that this is the favorite child and with
this comes a sense of kind of importance
and heightened esteem for the golden
child but it also comes with a complete
erasure of their personality so the
golden child learns that i will be given
special treatment and special care by my
parents if i become exactly who they
want me to be now this is not dissimilar
from the hero whose personality is kind
of erased in favor of being achievement
oriented the golden child is a little
bit different in that the role they're
trying to fulfill is the role of a kind
of mini version of their parent so if
the parent is devoutly religious the
golden child might also become devoutly
religious on the flip side if the parent
is incredibly irresponsible this child
might mimic that parent's behavior and
make them feel like hey it's cool it's
all fun that we're behaving like this
the golden child's role is to make the
parent feel like they are okay in their
own dysfunction because they're raising
a child who's similar to them and the
child is fine so it validates whatever
the parent's existing worldview is now
the golden child might seem like an
attractive role on the surface it might
be very very envied by the other
siblings however the golden child gets
treated like an adult in a way that is
really developmentally inappropriate so
they may be victims of what
psychologists call emotional incest
which is not to be confused with sexual
abuse but emotional incest is when the
parent treats the child more like a
spouse than like a child so they might
confide in them in a way that is not
appropriate for the child to be confided
in at the age that they're at they might
look at the child as a way to regulate
themselves so let's say we have a parent
with emotional regulation issues they
might see their child as the answer to
their feelings of need or desperation
maybe this is a parent who had a child
because they believed finally someone
will love and respect me unconditionally
if i have a child and it puts an immense
pressure on the child to fulfill the
emotional needs of the immature adult
the golden child might also be enlisted
in bullying their siblings alongside the
parent which can be very traumatic for
the golden child they often grow up with
a very deep kind of repressed but
nonetheless present and intense feeling
of guilt and remorse because they're
aware that they were treated very
differently from their siblings but they
don't know why and there are a lot of
mental justification they'll often make
but deep down they'll feel this sense of
something was wrong now with the golden
child they can also suffer a fall from
grace so if the golden child at some
point in their life does something that
violates the parent's moral code or that
makes the parent feel like oh you're not
serving as a good projection of my
positive qualities they might then
become the scapegoated child for example
let's say you have a child who is raised
in a very devoutly religious home who
then who later comes out as gay the
parent might switch from projecting all
of their positive characteristics onto
the child to projecting only negative
characteristics onto the child and
believing now i am unhappy because you
have brought shame or whatever it is
onto the family
and then the golden child will have a
complete role reversal which is
extraordinarily disorienting regardless
of the age at which this happens so none
of the dysfunctional family roles are
good by definition they all exist to
compensate for something that the
caregiver is not able to provide to the
child and over the next couple weeks
we're going to talk more about how this
relates to attachment styles because
attachment styles like family roles are
part of your adapted self so they are
the characteristics that you take on in
order to survive as best as possible
within the family unit that you were
born into and if you recognize yourself
in any of these roles i really really
recommend talking about it to a
therapist or counselor if you're able to
there are also some really good
resources that you can use to read about
these roles i will link in the
description of this video but for now i
just wanted to offer a brief
introduction and we will continue to
dive deeper into these and talk about
what to do if you find yourself in any
of these roles alright if you have any
questions please leave them in the
comments i will try to clarify what i
can
and i hope that you guys are taking care
of yourselves i love you and i will see
you next time
[Music]
you