hey guys Heidi prep here welcome back to
my channel I am sneaking this video in
today like I'm trying to film it before
I really notice that I'm filming it
because I have my dissertation for my
Master's Degree in attachment Theory due
in two weeks and I am super down to the
line right now so I told myself no more
YouTube until I'm done and then I woke
up and I really wanted to film a
particular video so I decided to sneak
into my office before I was fully awake
enough to notice and see if I could get
this filmed within like half an hour so
let's see if I can do that so what I
want to talk about today is a term that
I want to be clear is made up like there
is nothing that I know of established in
the field of psychology called the
worthiness wound although I did Google
it and I know a woman named Thai Sky who
I believe I follow on Instagram has a
bunch of work on like her podcast around
something that she has named the
worthiness wound but anyway I wanted to
call this particular phenomena the
worthiness wound because I imagine
that's a language that a lot of people
people can relate to so I hear a lot of
conversation out in the world out on the
internet in attachment healing spaces
about people feeling like they are not
worthy or deserving of love and healthy
relationships and I imagine in a lot of
cases that's a kind of natural extension
of the anxiously attached wound which
kind of looks at the world through the
lens of I am not okay there's something
wrong broken not good enough in relation
to myself but other people are okay so I
need to focus all of my energy all of my
efforts on getting other people to love
me and approve of me so that I can
become okay through osmosis of other
people's okayness right so this is in my
opinion kind of the same thing as having
what I would call a worthiness wound you
might also call this the mother wound
the belief that there is inherently
something not good enough about you
right something that means you should
not or do not deserve the same love and
care care and attention and affection
and self-respect and self-love that
other people seem to more naturally have
now healing this type of wound takes a
lot of work and I am unfortunately not
going to be able to tell you how to do
it comprehensively in this video but
what I want to talk about is actually a
particular phenomena that I've been
witnessing online as well as in real
life where people are kind of waking up
to this wound right so they're going oh
my gosh I'm realizing for the first time
in my life that I am just as worthy as
anybody else for going for the things
that I want in life and for having a
good fulfilling Rich wonderful life
right there is nothing inherently flawed
broken wrong bad with me
so now where is the life that I want
right there can be this kind of
dissociation I've noticed where as soon
as people start having these aha moments
about how there isn't anything wrong
with them they are a wonderful lovable
person just like everybody else there's
then this expectation that develops that
because they are worthy of the same good
lives that everybody else seems to have
they ought to already have them and I
think the problem here is that the
worthiness wound is being healed but the
competence wound is not so a few weeks
back on this channel we talked about
self-esteem and I divided self-esteem
into two categories that Nathaniel
Brendan talked about which was
self-respect and self-efficacy so when
we have solved our worthiness wound it
means that we've gotten to a place of
self-respect right we believe that we
are worthy of going after and pursuing
the things that we want in life and
there is no reason why we shouldn't get
those things if we put in the same
amount of work as everybody else now the
problem is that if you still have a
wound in that area of self-efficacy you
don't understand that being worthy of
those things doesn't mean you will
automatically get them you still have to
figure out logically how to pursue what
you want in life and only then will you
get it right so I kind of see healing
the worthiness wound as like putting
yourself in the starting line for a race
like you have decided okay there is no
reason why I should not be competing in
this race like everybody else I deserve
a place here I deserve the opportunity
to try there's nothing inherently wrong
with me that would disqualify me from
being a part of this event but that does
not mean that you automatically get the
gold medal handed to you as soon as the
gun fires and the race begins you still
have to learn how to run faster than
other people if you want to win the race
and in order to figure out how to win
the race you have to figure out what the
race looks like what the qualities and
mechanisms of the race are as well as
what type of work you need to put in in
order to get to the finish line and win
the medal you want so taking this out of
a metaphor what does it look like in
real life when you've done work on this
worthiness wound but you feel like wait
a minute where is this kind of life that
I wanted on the other side of this work
right it is on the other side of you
healing the competency wound so let's
say your entire life you have felt kind
of unworthy of love you felt like there
is something fundamentally flawed and
broken inside of you and you don't
deserve the same love and respect and
fair treatment that other people seem to
get now if you have healed that wound
and you now know that you are a
wonderful perfectly lovable person just
like everybody else it does not mean
everybody is automatically going to love
you if you meet someone and you want
them to love you back you have to really
think do I have the same values as this
person am I offering the things that
they want out of a partnership right
because Partnerships are not just about
two people being lovable lots of people
out there are lovable lots of people out
there are securely attached lots of
people know their value and worth and
they still aren't compatible with each
other right so seeing yourself is worthy
and lovable doesn't mean that
automatically everybody else is going to
fall in love with you all it means is
that you've taken down some of the walls
and defenses that would otherwise get in
the way right but if there's a
particular person you want to be with
you still have to think about am I
offering what that person wants are our
values aligned what do they find
attractive in other people and is that
something that I'm offering them there's
a quote from Dita vontes who is a
burlesque dancer that goes you can be a
delicious ripe Peach and there will
still be people in this world that hate
peaches right so I think that when we
get preoccupied with this kind of
worthiness wound this feeling of I'm not
good enough it's very easy to kind of
chalk everything up to that right and go
if I just learn to love myself if I just
learn to respect myself then everybody
else would love and respect me too but
no people still have preferences and
there are also things in the world that
you have to use your cognition to figure
out and work towards so another example
of this is let's say you have a wound
around thinking that you're not good
enough to have a high paying job like
maybe you've been doing work for most of
your life that you don't feel passionate
about and you are afraid to kind of go
out on your own and try your own thing
because you've decided like oh I'm not
smart enough or interesting enough or
I'm not as charismatic as other people
and then you do some work on healing
this wound and you're like wait a minute
I could do all of these things right I
could leverage my skill set and I could
become self-employed or ask for a raise
at work or whatever it is that you need
to take yourself to the next level in
but this does not mean that if you go
into work tomorrow and ask for a raise
having not improved your performance
whatsoever having not added any value to
the company you don't deserve one just
because you are a worthwhile lovable
human being right raises are the result
of hard work and of making your company
extra money successful business happens
when you find a need that other people
have and you're able to fill it in a way
that provides enough value for them that
they are willing to pay you a certain
amount of money for it you being
inherently lovable and worthy does not
mean that magically your need to do the
hard work to get the things you want in
life disappears all it means is that you
are now in the running right you've
decided that you deserve to be in this
race of people who are going for the
things they want in life and getting
them but it does not excuse you from
doing that hard work if you want to be
with a certain person have a certain job
experience a certain lifestyle believing
that you're good enough for that is step
one it puts you at the starting line but
figuring out a way to logically
understand the mechanisms of what it is
you're trying to get and then finding
ways that you can build the skills you
need to build to get that thing is what
actually gets you results right so
healing the worthiness wound will not
give you what you want out of life it
will just allow you the self-esteem and
the sense of confidence you need to
build the skills that you then have to
build and in order to get the outcome so
I think that right now we are very
focused on inner work in our society and
that's a great thing inner work is super
important but we have to remember that
inner work only gets us inner peace it
doesn't get us achievements in the outer
World it doesn't get us interpersonal
connections it doesn't get us things
that we can only get by actually putting
effort into our lives right because the
outside world has different rules than
the inside world in the outside world
all the things that we want to get we
have to work for we have to exchange a
certain amount of value in order to get
a certain amount of value back in order
to form close relationships we need to
give something that somebody else wants
in order to get their love and care and
affection in return in order to get a
certain job we have to provide enough
value for an organization to want to
give us money in return so what gets us
the things that we want in our inner
world is not the same as what gets us
the things that we want in our outer
world so all of this is to say if you've
done a ton of work on your inner world
and your inner sense of worthiness and
you're like wait where are my rewards it
might be because you are looking for
rewards in the outer world when you have
only done work in the inner world and
that just might mean that it's time to
now shift your focus onto the outer
world and figure out now that I believe
myself to be worthy and capable and
lovable and just like everybody else it
might be time to start tackling that
competency wound and working yourself to
a place where you believe that you know
how to tangibly logically get the things
that you want out of your outer World
alright that's all I have to say for
today on this topic I might make some
follow-up videos I like the terms
worthiness and competence wounds to kind
of represent the two sides of the
attachment Spectra but as always leave
your thoughts experiences perspectives
questions comments in the comments
section below this video and I hope you
are taking care of yourselves and your
inner children and each other and I will
see you back here again really soon
foreign