hey guys heidi preep here today i wanted
to make a video that i feel like there
is just so much confusion around because
as you know if you follow this channel
if you don't welcome to my channel we
talk both about attachment styles and
about different personality systems that
help us understand ourselves and other
people better now sometimes we get these
systems confused and we decide that they
are all one big system and that the
traits from one system must apply or
cross over in specific ways to the
traits of the other system but this is
absolutely not true so where i see this
confusion happening very commonly is
people will come to the videos about
fearful avoidant attachment and they
will talk about it as though it is
interchangeable with the term enfp
it is not so you can have any attachment
style have any myers-briggs personality
type and those two things do not
necessarily conflict with each other in
any way now this does not mean that the
expression of your personality type will
not be affected by your attachment
system it absolutely will and we are
going to go very deep into this in
upcoming videos that i will talk to you
about in a couple of weeks but for the
time being i want to talk about what the
difference is between let's say a
perceiver fearing commitment versus
someone who is afraid of commitment
because they are on the avoidant
attachment spectrum okay so again i see
a lot of people specifically thinking
that the term enfp is interchangeable
with the term fearful avoidant and i
understand the confusion because when
you look at the cognitive functions of
the enfp personality type you see that
we have this love of exploration and
this desire to not be tied down but also
this desire for intimacy and connection
and depth in our relationships which can
lead to a kind of hot or cold expression
when it comes to personal relationships
however this is not the same thing as
attachment wounding attachment wounding
is about having early experiences that
orient her worldview of relationships in
a specific way and in the case of the
fearful avoidant it often involves
having a large amount of unprocessed
unresolved trauma personality systems
particularly myers-briggs does not at
all look at trauma it does not look at
how our trauma responses shape the
expression of our personality so we have
to separate those two systems okay so
what i'm going to talk about today is
some of the reasons why an enfp who does
not necessarily have a fearful avoidant
or avoidant attachment style who may
have a perfectly secure attachment style
might still fear and struggle with
commitment right because there are
certain things that are just personality
traits or that are natural extensions
that might come out of our personalities
that can orient us a little bit more in
one direction or the other so here are
three reasons why the enfp in your life
might be a little bit fearful of
commitment even if they have a secure
attachment style so reason number one
why the enfp might struggle a little bit
with commitment is that we tend to think
very deeply about people about
psychology and about our own inner
worlds so because we are so oriented
towards understanding people we don't
necessarily find it difficult to connect
with a lot of people however this isn't
accidental it's often because we have
taken the time to really learn and
understand how other people operate now
a lot of the time other people only take
the time to do this if it's someone that
they love and care about right so if
you're someone who is not particularly
interested in psychology who is not
particularly interested in figuring out
what makes people tick you might only go
to great lengths to figure out what it
is that makes the people you love so
special if you have a concrete reason to
like you are extremely interested and
invested in them however the enfp tends
to find pretty much everyone they meet
really interesting and we might want to
psychoanalyze people really thoroughly
despite the fact that we don't actually
plan to get that close to them it's just
kind of this program that tends to run
in the back of our minds where we're
always thinking about what makes people
operate the way that they do but to
other people this can be mistaken as
extreme interest in them right so often
if we have even a passing interest in
someone we will take the time to really
get to know them really understand what
makes them tick and then we might feel
like once we've gone down that road a
little bit no this is just a friendship
right this isn't necessarily a serious
committed partnership that i want with
this person but it might feel different
from the other side because most people
are used to people only taking that
level and depth of interest in them if
they are very invested in getting to
know them in a relationship setting
right and to be fair and to not gaslight
everybody in the process of saying this
there is definitely i think a part of
most people who have auxiliary fi's
minds that naturally falls a little bit
in love with a lot of people because
we're so interested in people and we
love getting to know people i think that
if you get to know anyone on a deep
enough level you find something to
really love in that person right when
people show up in an honest and
vulnerable and open way it is hard not
to feel connected to them but because we
might get there with more people than
the average person it means that we have
to be very careful and intentional about
who we choose to make commitments to so
it might look like we are being
commitment phobic when in reality we are
just going deeper more quickly than a
lot of other people would and then kind
of withdrawing a little bit to consider
whether or not we want to take things to
the next level and i think that this is
not just an enfp issue i think that this
is an nf issue in general like enfps
infps enfjs and infjs i've all heard
speak about this where they're like yeah
people always think that we're way
closer than i necessarily feel very
quickly upon meeting them and so you can
imagine how intense it is when two and
f's meet each other but overall i do
think that that contributes heavily to
the stereotype that enfps are commitment
phobic it's actually that people don't
realize that we tend to go deep fairly
quickly with a lot of people and that
getting close quickly to someone isn't
necessarily abnormal for us so i think
there can be like a little bit of a
misperception there but now let's get
into the realer stuff so reason number
two why a lot of enfps truly do fear
commitment is because our inner
landscape if you will orients itself
towards possibility so when we are going
through the course of our day and we are
thinking our thoughts in our mind most
of what we are thinking about is what
could happen in the future and this is
especially true for younger enfps so
those of us who have not yet hit let's
say
loosely middle age which i realize is
like a very wide margin of time but i
think that it's a very common theme for
young enfps to be so captivated and
enchanted and in love with the
possibilities they envision for the
future that they can really struggle to
prioritize a relationship above those
possibilities so
my solution to this and what i would
always tell enfps is that you need to
try to find a relationship if it's what
you want that will open more doors for
you than it closes right and i do think
that once we find a relationship that we
do feel like allows us to be more free
and to explore more of the world and
more opportunities than we would have
without that relationship you can be
very happy to commit and we can be very
grateful and giving in a relationship
and we can be happy long term it's just
that it's difficult and rare to find
someone who values and prioritizes
future possibilities to the same extent
that we do right because we do
prioritize those things in my opinion
much more heavily than the average
person so even though we can love
someone and appreciate someone and
really value what they could bring to
our lives and maybe even love them
romantically it will be hard to make a
commitment if we feel like that person
is going to hold us back from the
opportunities that we see for our own
future because we are the happiest and
we flourish the best when we are able to
actualize on as many possibilities for
the future as we see fit and where we
are encouraged to go run and find out
and explore quite a bit and a lot of
people find that really stressful to
handle in a relationship right so i made
another video called
things that the enfp needs in a partner
something like that but one of the
biggest themes that came up in that
video and that i see coming up for enfps
in real life is that they need a partner
who really encourages their independence
and who is okay with living a life that
includes a lot of uncertainty and
variety because we thrive on those
things and that does not mean that those
things are better than certainty and
security and playing it safe in life
those things are absolutely respectable
values but they're not the values that
enfps tend to hold so it can feel
difficult for us to commit to any
relationship where we feel like our
independence or our ability to go for
things and to make wild exotic plans for
the future and to run down a lot of
different rabbit holes to figure out
what feels exciting to us in life is
going to be impeded upon by a
relationship and if that's the case even
if we love someone so much and even if
some part of us really wants to keep
them in our lives it's probably just not
going to be the best fit in terms of
combining lifestyles and when you're
looking at a long-term partnership
combining lifestyles is a humongous part
of that right so i think that a very big
reason why most enfps tend to struggle a
little bit with commitment is not
because they're emotionally unavailable
but because they recognize that they
have very unique interests and a very
unique way of living and they struggle
to find a partner who could meet them
there but it's not a fear of commitment
like if we meet someone who is happy
with the same kind of lifestyle that
we're happy with and who we love and
appreciate as a person i think we
actually kind of shine in those
partnerships and might be very happy to
commit to them because again we really
value emotional closeness and intimacy
it's just that we don't want to be held
back from the other things that we want
out of life and reason number three why
enfps tend to in my opinion get kind of
a bad rep for fearing commitment is a
little bit more true to form when it
comes to what it means to fear
commitment and it is that we take longer
in my opinion than the average person to
really figure out and feel comfortable
resting on who we are and what we value
in life so there are all of those things
that i just mentioned that are natural
parts of our cognitive process like
being explorative and wanting to have
lots of experiences and wanting to plan
for the future and try out a lot of
different things those are i don't know
if i would call them values but they are
inherent parts of our personality but
when it comes to actual values in terms
of what we want to intentionally
cultivate in our lives and what we want
to create stability and consistency
around those things take a long time to
figure out because the way that our
cognitive stacking is oriented means
that we have to go try things out see
for ourselves how we feel about them and
really figure out consistently over a
long period of time what we like and
what works for us before we're able to
say okay this is something that i am
sure i want in my life so an enfp might
not know in their 20s if they want to
live in the city or in the forest if
they want to focus really heavily on
their career or settle down and have a
family if they want to prioritize
community or prioritize personal
development or any other wide range of
priorities that one could form we often
feel the need to sample extensively
before we decide upon but when we do
start arranging our priorities often
closer to the age of let's say 30 or 40
when that introverted sensing really
starts to kick in and helps us see the
patterns about what we have consistently
valued over long periods of time we're
able to make decisions much more easily
but again i think that because a lot of
people don't have to go through the same
exploratory process or at least not to
the same extent that any doms tend to go
through in order to figure out who they
are and what they value it can feel like
we are constantly shifting the game
right like last week we thought we
wanted this and now we want this and
that can be disorienting to other people
especially to potential partners but
it's again just a different way of
operating and showing up in the world
because a lot of people choose their
values based on what has been passed
down to them from their family members
or society or what makes logical sense
to them and a lot of those things make
it easier to make long-term choices
earlier on in life because it doesn't
require the same sense of exploration to
land on a concrete path forward if your
values are coming from somewhere outside
of yourself or if your values are a
little bit more predictable and once
again there's no right or wrong way here
they're just different ways right
so for enfps it can be difficult for us
to commit to people early on in life
because we don't yet really know who we
are what we want and what we are going
to consistently value over the course of
our lives now this is not true for every
enfp it is obviously going to be
different person to person but i do see
this as a general trend and something
that i think enfps are a little bit
misunderstood for because someone with a
more traditional approach might not
understand why one thing was valued one
year and now something completely
different is being valued the next but
when you really understand the way that
the cognitive functions of the enfp
works you'll understand that that is the
process they have to go through any has
to move through all of these exploratory
phases in order to arrive at what feels
really meaningful and si takes note of
that and eventually compiles enough data
that feels comfortable making a concrete
decision and by the way if you don't
know what i'm talking about when i use
these terms i'm talking about the enfp's
cognitive function stacking which i go
over in detail in my six week enfp soul
boot camp course where we impersonate
the cognitive functions as different
characters who act out scenes from the
inside of the enfp's brain to help you
understand how you are processing
information making decisions and
otherwise operating internally listen
emmy well you were uh
protesting elephant cruelty in thailand
because
a stranger at a bar told you to go there
i just took the liberty of going through
your history and drawing up a few graphs
that i thought might help us both
understand how to move you a little
closer to your wellness goals so i will
leave the link to that in the
description of this video but for now
what you need to know is that the unique
way you process as an enfp or the way
that the enfp in your life processes
might have the best of intentions at all
times but might not be aware enough yet
of the internal sense of inconsistency
that comes from leading with dominant
extroverted intuition there's this poem
i found when i was in my early 20s by
the poet andrea gibson who i believe is
an infp personality maybe an enfp um but
in the poem there's this line they keep
coming back to that goes right now i
love you forever and i thought that that
was such a perfect encapsulation of
unself-aware extroverted intuition and i
don't think that the poet themselves was
not self-aware i think that it was just
a beautiful poem and that was a
beautiful way of expressing what that
feels like when you feel as though the
feeling is so strong in a moment that
you believe it will never end but then
of course we do feel differently as time
goes on and maturing means something
different for every personality type
right so sjs might need to mature
through opening up their world view and
learning to take on different
perspectives and the opposite might be
true for nps where they need to learn to
narrow their world view and decide on
which values and perspectives are going
to matter to them but it can feel in the
moment like everything that you are
feeling is going to last forever and it
takes a high degree of self-awareness
and of recognizing mindfully the
patterns of your own life to get to that
place where you can recognize that the
feelings you have in one moment might
not be relevant two weeks four months
six years from now and so commitments
should be chosen carefully intentionally
and mindfully but like anything that is
a process and it's going to take time to
get there so if you're an enfp be
patient with yourself in this process
the best thing you can do is be mindful
every step of the way don't beat
yourself up for who you are the way you
experience life and what you need in
order to feel energized and excited
about a long-term relationship but also
find a way to be honest with other
people once you become aware of your own
patterning and communicate what you need
in a way that manages other people's
expectations and helps them understand
what they are committing to and what
kind of lifestyle they are committing to
if they commit to you now once again
this is not to say that every enfp has a
secure attachment style you can have any
personality type and any attachment
style and we will talk much more about
that in the weeks to follow but for now
these are some of the non-attachment
related reasons why the enfp in your
life might have a bit of a fear of
commitment as well as what would need to
happen in order for that fear of
commitment to dissipate a little bit all
right i think that's all that i have to
say for today once again if you are
interested in taking a deep dive on the
way that you experience life and
relationships as an enfp make sure
you're checking out my website
www.heidiprev.com
i will put the link in the description
of this video and in the meantime i love
you guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and i will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]