hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel a lot of
what we talk about is how to get inside
our own minds our own thought patterns
our own bodies Our Own emotions in order
to get more of what we want out of our
lives and less of what we don't want and
today I want to talk about a particular
phenomenon so the phenomenon of feeling
like you lack follow-through maybe you
identify as the kind of person who has a
lot of dreams and goals and visions and
who maybe feels like they have a lot of
unexpressed potential inside of them but
for whatever reason you keep finding
yourself not actualizing on that
potential now there are of course Myriad
different reasons why this might happen
it could be that you're under-resourced
it could be that you struggle with
planning it could be that you get
emotionally dysregulated in the process
of working towards your goals and so you
struggle to stay on track but there's
also this one kind of foundational
problem that I've seen people run into
multiple times without seeming to have
an awareness of what it is and what that
is is the failure to distinguish what I
would call a real concrete actionable
plan that is likely to play out in
reality from a fantasy about the future
that we're using to self-regulate
through a difficult present moment now
here's where it gets sticky when we know
that a fantasy is a fantasy we are in
reality it's kind of like watching a
movie when I was a kid I loved Pirates
of the Caribbean but I was never
disappointed to wake up one morning and
find that I was not a pirate on a ship
in the middle of the Caribbean Ocean
because I knew that that was a fantasy
not reality but when we confuse fantasy
and reality things can get really sticky
really fast because we can start
expecting things to happen in reality
that we are not taking the proper
concrete steps towards in order to make
those things happen and so that's the
goal of what we're doing here too
distinguishing between fantasy and
reality and figuring out if we have
something in the fantasy category that
we want to be in the reality category
what would we have to do in order to
move that into the proper place so I
remember years ago there was this
coaching program that I was taking where
the people leading the program
encouraged us to use this assessment at
the beginning that would test the client
on a variety of different measures just
so we could kind of get an idea of where
they were starting from and one of the
measures was how future oriented that
person was so how much optimism and hope
did they hold for their future and I
remember looking at the assessment and
figuring well optimism about the future
would always be a good thing of course
right we need hope and inspiration and
motivation to get through our lives
however the instructors kind of stopped
us at one point and pointed out that if
we have a client who comes in and they
have a very very high level of optimism
about the future they are highly future
oriented however they score very low on
Hedonism and Present Moment enjoyment
it's possible that what you have is a
person who is not truly engaged with and
excited about their future but a person
who is really unhappy in the present and
who is using fantasies about the future
to escape from the present moment and
the more I thought about it the more I
thought about how that's the type of
person who is probably most likely to
struggle with follow-through because if
you are so unhappy in the present that
you can't even stay Associated to it for
long enough to figure out what steps you
need to take towards those goals you're
going to have a really hard time
reaching them now of course we all need
to plan and get excited about and feel
motivated to work towards our dreams and
visions of the future so in this video
what we're going to go over is how to
differentiate between a plan for the
future that is concrete actionable and
likely to actually play out versus a
plan for the future that is actually
more of a fantasy so without further Ado
we're going to go over five signs that
some of what you are considering to be a
goal or a plan might actually belong
more in the fantasy category as well as
what you can do to change that if you
decide that you would like to so sign
number one that your goal might actually
be a fantasy you are using for
self-regulation is that you are
constantly in the ideation phase when it
comes to new ideas but you rarely if
ever find yourself executing on your
ideas now what might happen here is you
might go I just don't execute because
I'm lazy especially if you're someone
who has toxic shame or who has a very
negative self image you can spend your
entire life in this stage beating
yourself up for never executing on your
ideas when in reality the reason you're
never executing on your ideas might be
because you are never present enough to
actually take the first steps in order
to work concretely towards our goals we
have to be in the present moment we have
to be aware of and noticing what's in
between us and our goals what about our
lives exactly as they are today is
income compatible with the goal that we
have for the future that's an incredibly
important thing to be present with
because it shows us the road map for
getting there
but if we are constantly dissociated
into the future because we find the
present really painful and we don't
actually like taking a look at our lives
as it is today right now it's going to
be really easy to just chronically
dissociate into that fantasy about the
future where you see maybe the last five
steps that you would need to take to get
there but not the first five because the
first five would require you to look at
your life exactly as it is today and
acknowledge the full spectrum of where
you are at if you have this dream where
you're super wealthy but today right now
you are in a ton of debt and you have no
idea how to get yourself out of that
debt what might happen when you think
about your Current financial situation
is you might get extremely overwhelmed
and that sense of overwhelm particularly
if you're someone who struggles with
toxic shame might lead your emotional
system to desperately grasp onto
anything it can to make itself feel
better and in this case what it grasps
onto might be a fantasy about the future
where the problem is solved but we
cannot solve problems until we start
from the ground that we are actually
starting from so we have to be willing
to land inside of the problem
Orient ourselves to where we are today
in relation to where we would like to
get to and spend a lot more time looking
at that than we do thinking about the
future fantasy it's kind of like looking
at a map and going here's this
phenomenal mountain peak that I want to
arrive at but being completely unwilling
to look at the you are here Mark the you
are here Mark tells us where we are
relative to where we want to get to and
if we are just chronically imagining
ourselves on the Mountaintop we're not
going to be willing to look at the path
through the valley that we have to take
to even arrive at the base of the
mountain right a goal or a plan starts
with the present moment and it gets
built continuously out of that so people
who are on their way to success are a
lot more focused on what they're doing
today and tomorrow and the next day than
where they imagine themselves to be in
five years that might be a program that
runs in the background of their mind
that keeps them motivated but the
majority of their thoughts and actions
are oriented towards what they are doing
in the present so that's a really big
sign that kind of distinguishes a real
goal or plan from a future one are you
thinking a lot about what you're going
to be doing in the next 72 hours to work
towards your goal or when you think
about your goal are you largely thinking
way into the future without a lot of
awareness of what's going to happen
between now and then sign number two
that what you're considering to be a
goal might actually be more of a
self-regulatory fantasy is that when you
picture the future you're picturing the
Highlight Reel but you're not really
picturing the reality of what that
future would look like on a day-to-day
basis so if you want to be an
award-winning actor or an award-winning
novelist or you want to be super rich
and Powerful are you only picturing
yourself accepting the awards checking
your bank account and seeing how much
money is in it having the perfect most
beautiful wedding imaginable with your
soul mate or are you also picturing what
it would feel like to be that kind of
person person on a day-to-day basis so
if you wake up and you are someone who
is extraordinarily powerful and Wealthy
do you think that really your job day to
day is going to be to sit around and
enjoy your wealth or are there going to
be a whole slew of new problems that
come along with this Fantasy Life that
if you were to have it in reality you
would have to deal with if you were to
achieve all of these things that you
seem to want so badly what would you
have to give up about the life that you
have right now would you have less spare
time would you have to vet your Social
Circle more carefully would you have
let's say a company to manage full of a
lot of moving parts that would add new
forms of stress to your day-to-day life
now this is not to say that you want to
take your fantasy or take your vision of
the future and get really negative about
it but what you do want to do if it's
actually a goal or a plan you have is
get really realistic about it so it's
not about throwing your current life in
the garbage and trading it in for a life
that is perfect and has no problems what
you're looking at when you set a real
goal that is not a fantasy is which of
my current problems do I want to trade
in for different problems that I like
better there is not a path in the world
you could possibly go down and there is
no place you could possibly arrive at in
life where you do not have any problems
where you are just Problem free forever
but a good life is about having a life
full of problems you like so if I want
to be an award-winning novelist do I
actually like sitting down to write do I
like the problem of writing a chapter
realizing something was kind of off in
there I don't really know what it is so
I'm going to reread it 17 times and try
to figure out what I need to change is
that a fun problem for me to solve if I
want to have a family do I actually like
the problem of figuring out how to raise
kids if I want to have a healthy
relationship do I like the problem of
learning to understand a new person a
adjusting to the ways in which they're
different for me figuring out conflict
resolution skills and getting to a place
where we can relate in a healthy way and
am I willing to accept the limitations
of all of those things am I willing to
accept that a romantic relationship is
not going to solve every area of my life
it's not inherently going to make me
feel good about myself forever it's not
going to fix issues that I have with my
family or with other relationships it's
not going to give me an enduring sense
of purpose and Direction and the same
goes for any particular fantasy are we
looking at this fantasy as a One-Stop
shop for solving all of the problems we
currently have or if it's a realistic
plan or goal are we looking at the new
problems it's going to bring into our
life and saying yes those are the
problems I want those are the things I
want to struggle with on a daily basis
that's the kind of work those are the
kind of questions that I want to spend
my life trying to answer knowing that
I'm going to get frustrated on route
that I'm going to get stuck that it's
going to feel difficult and challenging
is that the type of Challenge and
discomfort that I want to have that's
how we know that we are looking at a
more realistic plan as opposed to a
fantasy one in a fantasy plan there are
no problems our lives are solved forever
and we never again feel a negative
emotion because we have found the one
thing that forever takes away all of our
pain or we're romanticizing even the
problems that it would bring about right
but in reality we know that any plan or
any goal we take on is going to include
challenge pain failure strife and we
still want to say yes to it we look at
the goal and go that's the kind of
problems I want to deal with on a
day-to-day basis if your plan is more of
a fantasy you're going to get
discouraged real fast the second you try
to move towards it in reality and
realize oh this isn't a perfect
problem-free path Ergo I'm gonna Abandon
Ship because I didn't want the reality
of this thing and the problems that come
along with it I just wanted the fantasy
and if you just want the fantasy it's a
lot easier to stay exactly where you are
dissociate into the fantasy use it to
regulate through a difficult moment and
then go back to whatever life you have
built for yourself in the present which
probably includes the problems that
you're more comfortable solving sign
number three that you might be
self-regulating through plans about the
future rather than creating realistic
plans about the future is that you feel
very defensive talking about your plans
for the future because some part of you
knows that you don't actually intend to
follow through on them so if you're
telling somebody about let's say a
business idea that you have and they
start asking you questions about the
steps you're going to take to get there
you might instantly feel super defensive
because they're poking holes in your
fantasy your fantasy is a world where
you don't have to take action to get to
those goals or give anything up or trade
anything in about the life that you
currently have in order to get the one
that you want so when we have a real
concrete actionable plan and people
start giving us feedback on it
especially if we have explained clearly
to them where we're at we usually
welcome and feel enthusiastic about good
feedback because it helps us get closer
to where we want to get to but if our
plan is not a real plan and it's
actually just a fantasy that we use to
self-regulate someone pointing out to me
that I'm not taking the relevant steps
in that direction is going to feel like
they're stomping on my Daydream like how
dare you bring the reality into this
this isn't what that's about you know
it's kind of like watching Pirates of
the Caribbean and someone going well you
know this could never have happened
because X Y and Z shut up I'm watching
Pirates of the Caribbean I don't want to
remember that it's a movie right I want
to immerse myself in this and have fun
inside this make-believe world by
temporarily suspending reality and the
same is true when we have a fantasy if
it's not something that we're truly
trying to work towards in reality it's
going to feel really annoying when
people start talking about the reality
of it and we might find ourselves not
wanting to share what we think are our
dreams or goals with people who we know
are going to ask questions about the
reality of them because that's going to
force us out of that kind of spell that
we're in now this is just something to
note once again right it's not to say
that you have to take advice from
absolutely anybody who wants to chime in
on your goals or plans but it tends to
be a pretty rad flag alerting you to the
fact that a goal or plan that you think
you have is actually more of a fantasy
if you get really upset anytime someone
tries to bring the reality into it our
fantasies tend to be very private things
that we can get real touchy about real
quick but our goals and plans tend to be
more realistic things that feedback can
be really helpful for or even someone
just asking a question that you realize
you don't have the answer to can be
really helpful if you're working towards
a concrete goal right because even
though it might feel kind of
embarrassing for a moment it alerts you
to a blind spot or a gap in your
knowledge that might be really important
for you to focus on in order to get
closer to your goal so overall that
feedback process is more helpful than it
is annoying but again if it's a fantasy
feedback is more annoying than it is
helpful so just noting where you fall on
that scale might be really useful in
pointing you in the direction of
figuring out whether what you're working
with is a plan or if it's just a fantasy
the next sign that what you think is
your plan about the future might
actually be more of a fantasy that
you're using to self-regulate through
difficult moments is that the older you
get and the longer your life goes on for
the more regret you experience about the
life that you didn't lead and this is
one that can be kind of tender and heavy
for a lot of people because when the
best option we have out of our lives
from a young age is to dissociate into a
fantasy about a better life what we tend
to develop is a feeling of learned
helplessness this feeling of I don't
actually have the power to make my life
better but there's a small hopeful part
of me that knows that I'm capable of
more right that knows that there's a me
out there who's living more in alignment
with the person I actually am and who
has relationships and a life that
reflects my authentic self so there
might be this awareness throughout a lot
of your life that you're not living up
to what you know or can conceive of to
be your true potential probably because
you're doing what you learn to do from a
young age and dissociate from the
present and chronically focus on
fantasies about the future but there's a
certain point where this strategy kind
of starts to fail right when you're in
your early 20s and everybody is full of
hopes and dreams and plans for the
future it might not be as obvious to you
or to other people observing you that
you're not actually taking the relevant
steps towards your plans but by the time
a few more decades have passed and
you're looking back on your life and
recognizing a lot of what I wanted to
happen for whatever reason I couldn't
find a way to make happen it starts to
become harder to deny that unless you
change something your goals and dreams
and plans might never come to fruition
and you might end up with a deep sense
of regret because you have memories of
all of these plans and Ambitions you
once had but when you look back on your
life you notice that those things didn't
happen
now I want to be clear it is not ever
too late as long as you are alive to
turn that train around maybe some goals
have certain types of expiration dates
however you are never at a loss of where
to take your life next if you can learn
the art of presencing yourself and
actually starting to build from the
ground up so instead of starting at the
end of the process start now in the next
72 hours and you will start to actually
build a life that you want to have
nobody just wakes up the next morning
and magically has the life that they
want but everybody has the capacity to
do something in the next 24 hours of
their life that brings them closer to
the Future they actually want the only
way to guarantee that you are never
going to get there is to spend every 24
hour period of your life thinking and
fantasizing about the future without
taking any steps towards it so if this
is a place that you have arrived at this
place of recognizing that you are a
person with so much potential so many
hopes so many dreams about the future
and that you have always been that way
but very few of those plans have come
through and you're experiencing a sense
of regret about that ask yourself the
question what could I do in the next 24
hours because I can guarantee you that
the people out there who are currently
working towards their goals and dreams
and plans and are actually going to get
to where they want to get to they have a
plan for what they are going to be doing
within the next 24 to 72 hours to get
there and that is what separates you if
you are not doing that from the type of
people who are and there's this other
kind of tender edge here that I want to
bring up which is that the more we live
our life in the present moment the more
wonderful memories we end up with
because we're actually paying attention
to our lives as they're happening and
we're actually noticing the really
beautiful moments when they arrived to
us often completely unexpectedly if we
are always zoned out and dreaming about
a different life it's really hard to
make meaningful memories inside of the
present moment and so it's much more
likely that we'll be left with a sense
of emptiness and regret when we look
back on our lives if we spent the whole
time dissociated into some fantasy about
things being different in the future in
order to feel thankful and grateful and
happy and satiated looking back on our
lives we have to be willing to show up
to the present moment and actually
notice what's happening inside of that
moment and learn to love and appreciate
what's happening so this idea of
focusing on the next 24 hours is really
in large part about bringing our
attention back to the only thing that's
ever real which is the present moment
and if we are living inside of the part
of our lives that is real we're going to
naturally at the end of our Lives end up
with a plethora of experience chances
and memories that we feel really
grateful to have had that sense of
emptiness looking back on our lives
won't even be a possibility because we
want to spend our lives sleepwalking
we'll have spent them living and chances
are if you stay really committed to the
act of living in the moment which can
very much include taking consistent
concrete action towards your goals
you're going to find that what happens
on Route is a lot more meaningful than
what happens at the top of the mountain
anyways there's a million cliches about
that so I will spare you them in this
video but there are a million cliches
about that for a reason what happens to
us on the way towards our goals is where
the story of our life actually unfolds
and we are robbing ourselves of the
opportunity to have a life story at all
if we are spending our entire lives
avoiding the present moment in favor of
dreaming about a distant future and the
last sign and this is a huge one that
your plans or visions of the future are
more fantasy than they are reality is
that you see this kind of future version
of yourself as the most or the only
authentic version of you so you have
this idea that you're going to build
yourself into a different person and
maybe that person is the you that you
know is hiding in there but that you
feel like isn't allowed to or won't be
able to emerge until you have a
completely different life again we build
a completely different life from the
present moment out so in the moment when
you're feeling overwhelmed and you're
noticing yourself go into this magical
fantasy about the future ask yourself
who is present in this moment if I were
to drop the fantasy and actually look
around and Survey the life that I have
at this exact moment in time including
the person that I am in this exact
moment in time what would I see what
would be coming up for me emotionally in
this moment where I'm dissociating into
a future where I feel prideful and happy
and like I have no problems is it
possible that what's actually going on
for me in the present moment is is a
feeling of Shame inadequacy pain in some
capacity and how can I stay present with
those feelings how can I accept that all
of those things are a part of who I am
and that I am never going to get to a
level of success where I don't feel
those difficult emotions I have to take
Who I Am with me on this journey if I
ever want to get anywhere so who I am
right now in this moment is not a
mistake or an accident that I can
correct by dissociating into a fantasy
about the future where all the things I
don't like about myself are magically
absent and only qualities that I do like
about myself are present and on display
for everyone to see there is no version
of the future that is real that involves
you not having to experience any of the
more difficult aspects of The Human
Experience you can be the richest person
in the world you could have the love of
your dream or ideal partner you could
accomplish everything you have ever
wanted to accomplish in your life and
nothing none of that not a single part
of it is going to save you from being
human you will arrive at any of those
goals and you will still have shame pain
regret insecurity wounding from
childhood all of those things you cannot
personally develop your way out of you
have to learn how to integrate them be
present with them
feel them accept them as a part of the
human experience and learn to bring them
with you on your pathway towards your
goals and you might be wondering at this
point why even work towards goals if I'm
still going to feel all of those things
when I get there and this brings us all
the way back to point number one
realistic plans and goals are about
trading in the problems of your current
life for problems that you would prefer
to have there is no life where you have
no problems but setting the right types
of goals means we're putting ourselves
on the track to having problems that we
more naturally enjoy having and usually
those problems are problems that are
more aligned with our authentic selves
so as the people we actually are which
questions would we like to spend our
lives exploring which problems would we
like to spend our lives chipping away at
which types of relationships with which
types of people would we like to spend
our life figuring out how to navigate
because in all of these areas we are
never done ever we will never have a day
in our life where we have finally wiped
our hands clean of all problems and
there's not a single area left in our
lives where there is no tension or
nothing to resolve so our absolute best
shot at having a life that we actually
want to show up to is picking the right
types of problems that are aligned with
the people we actually are the holistic
version of ourselves and spending our
lives struggling delightfully with those
problems that's what it means to have a
realistic plan or goal to have an
Escapist worldview means to hold tight
to the belief that something we could do
or figure out in the future will absolve
us from Pain forever that's not an
option for any of us and it never will
be but if we can kind of mine the Gold
from those fantasies so figure out what
about my life in those fantasies or my
relationships or myself do I absolutely
love and how can I balance out that
fantasy with the realities of what would
come along with getting that thing and
find a way to start concretely working
towards it you know that you have found
a path that you enjoy being on when you
like taking the steps towards it it's
not just about picturing the Mountaintop
you're actually enjoying the hike
because you have chosen a goal that you
feel aligned with so every step of the
way you are getting closer to the type
of person that you actually want to be
in the world and the types of problems
that you actually enjoy trying to solve
alright that's all I have to say for
today on the topic of whether you are
using your goals and plans as
self-regulatory fantasies or whether
they are more realistic as always let me
know in the comments what's coming up
for you as you're watching this I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children and I will see you back here
again super soon
[Music]