hey guys heidi preeb here welcome back
to my channel if you are new here we use
this channel to talk about myers-briggs
personality types attachment styles and
any other systems that can help us
understand ourselves and other people
better as well as how we can bridge the
gap between ourselves and other people
using these systems and how we can use
different tools and different
vocabularies to make changes in the way
that we operate and show up in the world
so today i wanted to talk about a
specific vocabulary distinction that has
actually gotten a lot of attention in
recent years so shane kind of comes in
and out of public awareness as a topic
brene brown recently had a whole bunch
of research on it that became super
popular in the last like 10 years or so
i think but she is very far from the
first shame researcher john bradshaw did
a ton of incredible work in the field of
shame as did a plethora of psychologists
before him so this is not a new topic
but it is one that comes up over and
over again because shame and guilt are
two terms that are very commonly kind of
mixed up psychologically when we talk
about the negative emotion of having
done something wrong but they're
actually two pretty different feelings
and i think it's really important to
identify properly which one you're
dealing with because i think a lot of
the time we use those terms
interchangeably in situations where they
actually shouldn't be used
interchangeably so here are some of the
distinctions between those two terms and
i should note that these distinctions
are not commonly agreed upon like
different theorists will talk about them
in different ways some people say that
you kind of can use these terms
interchangeably other people will say
not at all you should look at them
differently i air a little bit more in
that camp and i'm going to explain why
as we go through this video because i
think that specifically if you're doing
attachment healing work those two terms
are going to come up a lot and the way
that you deal with them and the way that
you process and react to them is going
to have to be a little bit different
because the way that they show up in the
body and in the psyche are different and
lead to different outcomes if they're
dealt with unconsciously rather than
mindfully and intentionally so the kind
of core easy definition that i like to
use when i think about the difference
between shame and guilt is that guilt is
the feeling of i made a mistake i did
something wrong my behavior was wrong
shame is the feeling of i am a mistake
who i am as a human being my very
essence is flawed there's something
wrong with me i shouldn't exist that's
kind of what's at the core of the
feeling of shame versus guilt could at
the core of it have the feeling i'm an
okay person i'm a good person but i did
something wrong right so it's not as
extreme because it's not tied to your
identity now you can have a shame-based
identity so you can be a person who
really does believe at their core that
they're fundamentally flawed and there's
something wrong with them every insecure
attachment style to a degree has that
belief about themselves and you can also
feel guilt right so those things can
co-exist but guilt is more about your
behavior shame is more about your
identity or sense of self and the reason
this is the case is because guilt is
actually a slightly more complex feeling
than shame so to have guilt you have to
have an inherent understanding of the
fact that other people are processing
and believing and thinking things that
are different from the way that you
process and think about and believe
things and you have to notice the
juxtaposition between what you did and
the impact that it had on someone else
so you can do something perfectly well
meaning it can have a negative impact on
someone else and you can feel guilt
about that once you understand that
person's perspective right versus with
shame it's actually an emotion that we
experience a lot sooner in life so shame
most psychologists believe we start
feeling somewhere around 15 months and
our earliest experiences with shame is
often a sense of disconnection so a baby
goes to its parent and tries to engage
it in some way and if the parent isn't
available or isn't responsive or doesn't
give the baby the warm response that the
baby's looking for the baby feels a
sense of disconnection of shame and of
feeling almost like their sense of self
is disintegrating and the reason it
feels that way as a baby is because when
you are that young you don't actually
have a very clear idea yet of the fact
that you and your caregiver are separate
people babies look at their caregivers
as kind of an extension of themselves
for a very long period of time and
during that period of time if they are
not mirrored by their caregiver they
experience that profound sense of shame
is almost a part of their selfhood
crumbling and that's often why when we
experience shame as adults it truly
feels like the words that people use
very often are like a disintegrating
feeling like oh i want to like sink into
the ground and kind of let this terrible
feeling just decompose me it's actually
very interesting how similar so many
different people's account of the word
shame is and how many of them experience
that same kind of somatic feeling of
disintegration so there's a book that
i'm currently reading called
understanding and treating chronic shame
by patricia deyoung and i'm probably
gonna make a whole video on it once i'm
done it because it's a really good look
into how attachment and shame end up
fusing together but basically what the
author argues is that shame is the
feeling of your sense of self
disintegrating in the presence of a
dysregulating other and that starts to
happen very young and that's why from a
very young age babies can feel and
experience shame guilt cannot be
experienced until there's argument over
it but at least the age of three
somewhere between two and six we start
experiencing guilt and i think that that
kind of grows and grows because before
the age of six you don't have much of a
moral conscience like children below
that age aren't really able yet just
developmentally to think in terms of
right and wrong and to feel guilty you
have to be able to have some awareness
of moral consciousness right or at the
least and this is the argument for
children being able to feel guilt quite
a bit younger than six years you have to
have an idea that you are separate from
other people and that you can do
something that feels good to you but
feels bad to someone else it's a process
called mentalizing that we develop
continuously over the course of our
lifetime but that really starts coming
online around the age of four and once
you're able to mentalize you're able to
understand i have a different mind than
someone else so what's acceptable to me
is not necessarily acceptable to someone
else and it's not going to be a very
sophisticated process at age 4 but it's
going to be present enough that it's
something the child can conceptualize of
so once we're able to do that we're able
to experience guilt because we're able
to understand my actions that feel good
for me didn't necessarily have a
positive impact on someone else so guilt
is a more sophisticated emotion solely
because it requires higher level
thinking to access whereas shame is an
earlier emotion which means that our
brain has been wiring itself around
shame for a longer time than it's been
wiring itself around guilt so shame
often feels kind of overwhelming and
all-consuming in a way that guilt
doesn't necessarily always feel and the
reason for that is because guilt is a
little bit more complex so there's a
much more mental component active to
feeling guilty as opposed to shame which
can be purely instinctually emotionally
based when it comes up so i've kind of
already talked about it but the second
differentiation point between guilt and
shame is that when you are feeling
guilty you are by definition considering
someone else's perspective versus when
you feel shame you're actually very
preoccupied with your own perspective
even if it doesn't feel that way so you
might feel like you're thinking about
what everyone else thinks of you and
you're thinking about judgments people
might be making of you but shame is
actually a very kind of all-consuming
very internal experience where we often
get kind of hijacked by the feeling of i
am a mistake everything i've ever done
is wrong i shouldn't exist and those
thoughts are so huge and so overwhelming
that it's actually very difficult to
keep someone else's perspective in mind
in a clean and true way when we're
experiencing shame we are very likely
when we're experiencing shame to assume
that everyone is looking at us with all
of the judgment and all of the
maliciousness with which we are looking
at ourselves and that's often not at all
the case but it gets us into a little
bit of trouble when we think that we're
feeling guilt but actually what we're
feeling is shame because and this leads
me to the third and last distinction
that i'm going to draw on today when we
are experiencing shame we feel the drive
to disconnect and to isolate versus when
we are feeling guilt we tend to feel the
desire to reach out and make amends and
i think that many people particularly
those of us who are insecurely attached
in some way think that they are feeling
guilty when actually they're feeling
shame and it can feel like when we are
in shame we are berating ourselves so
heavily we are so focused on the
terrible things that we think about
ourselves that it might actually feel
like we are absolving ourselves from the
need to act and make amends because
it can feel like okay well i've beat
myself up so much i've judged myself so
much for this that now i must kind of
naturally be forgiven for the bad
actions that i've taken because i've put
myself through psychological hell over
it but
because shame is such an all-consuming
emotion that is focused intensely on the
self it's actually very easy to forget
when we're feeling shame that the pain
we have caused other people does not go
away by us hating ourselves it only goes
away by us showing up acknowledging
which actions we've taken and making
amends with that person so i had an
experience recently where i was
discussing something with a friend that
had happened a very long time ago that i
had felt so much shame over for so long
that i just never brought this thing up
i just kind of buried it in one of the
drawers in my psyche and was like i'm
never gonna revisit that and then it
came up in conversation and i felt this
like avalanche of shame like i was
frozen i could barely speak my friend
had to be like ooh breathe i left the
conversation and was like oh my god i
did not know i had so much shame about
that thing and it occurred to me like
three hours later after like meditating
on it journaling a little bit about it
oh i've been feeling shame over this
thing for so many years because there's
something i feel guilty about that i
actually never acknowledged and that
feeling of my own hatred towards myself
and how i handled the situation and my
embarrassment over how i handled the
situation actually was shrouding me from
the very simple solution to reaching out
to the person that i may have hurt all
of those years ago and just apologizing
so that was what i ended up doing that
night and it was totally chill they were
like it's water under the bridge
whatever forget about it but because i
had buried the guilt of the experience
under like layers and layers of shame it
became this much bigger thing in my head
right and that's very often what happens
when an emotion is shame-bound so john
bradshaw talks about shame-bound
emotions as feelings that we have that
we have shame around the very fact that
we feel them so depending on what your
attachment style might be or depending
on myriad other factors related to how
you were raised and what you came to
view as acceptable versus non-acceptable
emotionally you might feel shame around
a variety of seemingly nonsensical
emotions to feel shame around so anytime
you feel weak and vulnerable you might
automatically feel shame on top of that
or maybe it's the opposite maybe anytime
you feel proud and independent
automatically that feeling gets obscured
by shame depending on what it was that
we were encouraged to feel or not feel
very early on in our lives we can have
patterns of certain emotions always
being obscured by shame as soon as we
feel them and it's incredibly important
to figure out which emotions those are
for us because those are the emotions
where we're actually going to be blocked
the most from feeling guilt around
because remember as soon as an emotion
comes up and shame comes up to cover it
our instinctual response is to disappear
get out of there and not feel that
feeling at any cost but in order to feel
guilt about things that we've done or
said in relation to other people we have
to be able to sit with those feelings
for a while right so if this particular
emotion that i had been feeling had not
been a shame-bound one for me i could
have just sat down looked at that
situation all of those years ago and
gone oh i think i hurt this person or i
think i wasn't fair to this person let
me go apologize and move on with my life
but because i had an emotion around that
situation that was shame-bound every
time i thought of that situation i just
wanted to disappear get out of that
place in my head go do something that
was distracting and so i was never able
to actually sit down and look clearly at
my own behavior and the impact that it
had on other people and this is
something that almost everyone in some
large or small form struggles with but
that we very rarely talk about the fact
that shame-bound emotions are actually
the things that keep us from doing the
right thing much of the time because we
believe that that form of
self-punishment because it's so
overwhelming is kind of a psychic means
of making amends when in reality we
might be completely and totally
neglecting to look at the impact that a
certain situation had on someone else
because we're so overwhelmed by the
shame that comes up for us when we
process it and that's why understanding
the difference between these two
emotions as well as understanding what
they feel like in our body so we know
which one it is that we're experiencing
is so important because guilt can
actually be a very helpful
self-monitoring process that helps us to
understand where our behavior is and is
not impacting others in a negative way
whereas shame is actually going to
obscure our judgment a lot of the time
and keep us from seeing that and in any
attachment healing journey which is
going to involve frequent obstacles both
personally and interpersonally figuring
out which one you're dealing with and
what the appropriate response is and or
where you might have blind spots around
a situation because it's being shrouded
by shame is incredibly important because
it helps you understand which actions
need to be taken to repair relationships
with other people when that's something
you need to do and sometimes guilt isn't
even about repairing relationships with
other people you could have guilt over a
situation where you think that you
should not go and apologize to that
other person because maybe that would be
opening up an old wound that would not
be helpful but you can use that
self-awareness to understand why your
actions were wrong and set some kind of
internal boundary that can make you feel
certain that in similar situations in
the future you're not going to behave in
the same self or other destructive way
right okay that is all that i have to
say for today on the difference between
guilt and shame i probably will make a
follow-up video on this because shame in
particular is such an all-consuming
emotion that comes up so frequently in
the attachment healing process and it
can be really difficult to manage our
emotions around it when it does show up
so we need tools for that and i'm going
to work over the next little while to
start developing my own tools for it and
i will let you guys know of anything i
find along the way or anything i already
have found in follow-up videos so of
course if you guys have tools for
dealing with and managing shame
internally let us know in the comments i
love when you guys share what's working
for you with each other because that is
how we all collectively get better and
until next time i love you i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and i will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]
you