hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel I
want to talk about the intersection of
two terms that we've spoken about
individually at length but never looked
at how they combine to create this kind
of blend of new issues that tends to
pertain to our romantic relationships in
particular so the concepts we're going
to be looking at today are the concept
of liance or romantic obsession and the
topic of toxic shame now if either of
these terms are unfamiliar to you
completely I will link in the
description of this video individual
videos I've made that go over both of
those topics in depth but if you're
already familiar with one or both of
those topics you can stick around and
today we're going to talk about how they
feed into each other quite naturally as
well as steps you can take to begin
reversing that cycle to get yourself
into more connected authentic
realtime relationships that actually Aid
in your healing process from toxic shame
rather than push you further and further
into it so the first thing we're going
to look at is of course how do these two
constructs interact with each other
those of you who struggle with toxic
shame or complex PTSD which toxic shame
is a part of already know that it can be
a very isolating experience when we live
with toxic shame that belief that there
is something wrong with us that we are
flawed or broken in some fundamental way
that if anybody really saw they would
necessarily reject us permanently for
the natural solution to that problem at
least as far as our emotional systems
intuitively understand it is to go into
most situations wearing a social mask so
presenting only the version of ourselves
that we believe would be acceptable to
other people and hiding all of the
emotions or all of the parts of our
thinking or belief systems or ways of
looking at the world that we think other
people would reject us for the problem
is that this means we are often hiding a
very significant portion of who we are
and going into most situations forming
connections based on a pseudo version of
ourselves which by the way is not a
conscious or intentional choice we make
it's something we just naturally start
doing without even knowing that we're
doing it very early on in our lives if
struggle with toxic shame all of this
leads to a sense of deep
loneliness even if we have people in our
lives even if we have social groups
we're a part of even if we have a lot of
surface level connections to be
constantly operating from a social mask
comes with the natural consequences of
burnout which often causes us to retreat
because being alone might be the only
place where it feels safe to process our
feelings and be who we actually are and
in that constant retreating process we
can become incredibly isolated and
lonely when we are isolated and lonely
the intuitive solution to that problem
is often to begin forming fantasy
connections and in our fantasy lives
when we are experiencing liance that
obsessive mental fixation on a romantic
object what we are often experiencing
and why it often feels so good is
because it is offering us a temporary
reprieve from The Chronic underlying
feelings of shame that we feel so
imagining this fantasy world where
somebody who is perfect who we believe
or have convinced ourselves is Flawless
finally loves us and sees us fully and
completely and believes that we are good
and worthwhile and okay means that we
will never have to feel shame again and
when we are in that fantasy we are
getting a temporary reprieve once again
again from that underlying shame that
encompasses much of your experience of
life if you're someone who struggles
with toxic shame the problem here is
that now we've made this Association
inside of our own minds that romantic
relationships or romantic love is the
thing that cures us from feelings of
shame or low self-worth and in reality
this is not at all what romantic love
does romantic love when it is healthy
and honest and secure between two people
who are not idealizing each other but
who see each other for who they actually
are in those relationships whatever is
inside of us gets mirrored back to us so
if we are people who have an
overwhelming amount of Shame and
self-hatred and self-loathing that's
exactly what's going to get brought to
the surface inside of authentic
connections and so when we go out into
the world and try to have authentic
connections with more secure people
we're likely going to be met with an
overwhelm of just feeling like we are
aliens or freaks or there's something
wrong with us but when we form
connections with people who aren't
really into being fully seen for who
they are and who aren't really into
seeing us for who we truly are often
because there's Mutual wounding in place
that's preventing both of you from being
truly vulnerable with each other that
might feel a lot more similar to the
kind of fantasy love that we have inside
of our minds and so insecure love is
going to feel a lot more like your
internal representation of love if
you're someone who struggles with toxic
shame and has a lot of liance then
authentic stable and secure love does so
this allows that goose chase to continue
towards the idea that your self-esteem
will be forever healed if only you can
find a perfect person and get them to
love you and this fantasy can feel like
an unbelievable high and that high can
be a really nice reprieve from the lows
that you are used to existing within but
if we try to force this strategy of
finding a perfect person and getting
them to love us enough to heal our
self-esteem into reality it is
absolutely going to fail for three
reasons reason number one why this is
absolutely not going to work is because
there is never some sort of optimal
perfect State you will achieve that
allows you to feel confident and secure
and good about yourself forever so a lot
of us who experience toxic shame have
this kind of idealized self inside of
our minds where we go okay once I look
like this and feel like this and act
like this and have these external things
in my life then I will be good enough to
be loved and to let somebody who is also
perfect into my life but in reality that
idealized state does does not exist
there will not ever be a point in our
lives where we have everything figured
out permanently so if we want real
relationships what we have to look at is
what are the things that I struggle with
and what type of person is going to be
compassionate towards and willing to
accompany me on the Journey of
struggling with those things on and off
potentially for the remainder of my life
not who is going to love me only when
I'm at my best and how do I make sure
I'm always at my best in order to be
loved that is a failing strategy the
strategy of figuring out who likes the
types of problems that we have and who
has the types of problems that we like
helping people with is the basis of
secure relating so the bad news is that
when you have relationships that are
grounded in reality the other person is
going to see all of your quirks all of
your shortcomings all of the things that
you may have traditionally been trying
to hide from Partners but the good news
is that they could potentially be a
really strong support system for you as
you learn to navigate through those
problems and solve them for yourself and
as you're listening to this it might
kind of feel at this point like this is
an absolutely herculan impossible task
like how could you ever let someone in
who sees all your weird quirks and
habits and neurosis and I think it's
important to note here that all of those
kind of neurotic habits you might
practice often sprang into existence
because you didn't have enough
co-regulation at an early age so when we
are young if we have a secure caregiving
environment we first get our needs met
through sensitive and attuned caregivers
who help us develop an understanding of
what our needs are and how to respond to
them on our own when other people are
not available for co-regulation so then
we have this healthy balance of
sometimes going to others to get our
needs met but also Al being able to take
care of our own needs and respond to our
own emotions as they come up in a
healthy way if when you were young you
did not have a sensitive attuned
caregiving environment what's likely to
happen is you are going to become
confused about how to meet your own
needs and you might altogether reject or
fail to become dependent upon
co-regulation because other people don't
really understand you and because you
don't have a good grasp on your own
needs and feelings you might develop
very erotic patterns of behavior that
help you stay somewhat regulated in the
absence of that which works better and
then you might develop shame around
those patterns and behaviors and not
want to let someone in to see what your
life is like but once again if we are
learning to choose our relationships
based on who we're truly compatible with
we're going to find that the people
we're selecting are people who've
probably also struggled in similar ways
and who might have their own patterns of
neurosis and so yeah they might come in
and see all of our weird patterns and
habits but eventually through the
process of learning more about each
other and beginning to co-regulate and
feeling like we have a soft place to
land in the world and a secure base
inside of our close relationships we're
going to find we need less and less of
those neurotic patterns in order to stay
regulated and this doesn't have to be
something that happens in a partnership
we can find that secure base and that
healthy co-regulation through therapy
through support groups through friends
or family members if any of those
resources are available to us but the
idea here is that all of those parts of
yourself that you want to do away with
because you believe that they are just
Testaments to your Brokenness are
actually just Testaments to the
co-regulation you once did not have
available to you and if you want to have
a secure healthy relationship it's
probably going to be with another person
who's able to understand that that's
been a part of your journey and that
maybe you're still struggling with it in
some respects
you are not ever going to have a secure
healthy relationship with someone who
needs you to be perfect in order to love
you that is not love that is
transactional relating which if we
struggle with toxic shame and liance
might look indistinguishable from love
to us so that's something to be really
diligent about keeping in mind the
second reason this strategy of finding a
perfect person to love us in order to
heal our self-esteem is bound to fail is
because there are no Perfect People
people in reality and before you go
ahead and go no no no I know my liant
object isn't perfect I can name 10 flaws
that they have off the top of my head
ask yourself are those flaws things that
you are considering to be potential deal
breakers like are you looking at the
actual issues that might arise in the
relationship that might get in the way
of you two being able to make it work or
are you just idealizing their flaws and
telling yourself that you uniquely
understand them and love love them
enough to make those flaws irrelevant
the latter is liance the former is the
type of honest scrutiny that it takes to
navigate a secure romantic relationship
the fact that absolutely nobody is
perfect and that there is nobody who is
perfect for you means that you have to
show up in reality to your
relationships understand what your own
needs strengths and weaknesses are be
able to communicate them and then find a
person who's able and willing to do that
with you in return when we see a person
as perfect what we're most often doing
is placing them up on a pedestal because
we're uncomfortable with the idea that a
romantic partner could need something
very real from us as well so often if we
find someone who seems absolutely
perfect what's actually happening is
that we're just mistaking this person
not expressing their needs for them not
having any and then we're assuming that
they are so fine and so strong and so
self-regulated that they will be
available to meet all of our needs and
help us heal all of our self-esteem
wounds when in reality that is not how a
romantic relationship Works in reality
romantic relationships that are healthy
and secure are about co-regulation so
they're about two people coming together
and sharing the whole of themselves with
each other so the good parts but also
the bad parts and the shameful parts and
the parts that are in progress and the
parts that you truly wish were not a
part of yourself or the other person and
being witnessed as you navigate through
all of that we cannot healthily
co-regulate in a romantic relationship
where one or both people are holding
back significant parts of who they truly
are and what their true experience of
reality is like there has to be a mutual
willingness to see the other and be seen
by the other deeply in order for
relationship to actually have legs now
the good news is that once you stop
looking for a perfect person your
options open way up for dating and
making connections because absolutely
nobody is a perfect person and then it's
just a matter of figuring out okay which
things am I willing to work with which
quirks or traits or kind of frustrating
parts of a person don't bother me so
much that it's a deal breaker or what
kind of energies that might frustrate
another person am I actually kind of
happy to work with and to smooth out the
Kinks with inside of a relationship this
is the stuff that actually starts
leading us towards who we're compatible
with but in order to figure out where
our compatibilities lie in the first
place we have to drop that notion of the
perfect other who is needless and can
heal us from the inside out just by
virtue of loving us and the last reason
why this strategy of trying to find a
perfect person to love us in order to
heal our self-esteem forever is not
going to work is because that is not how
self-esteem
heals self-esteem does not heal through
meeting all of these external standards
of good enough and then constantly
monitoring ourselves to make sure that
we are never messing up that is how
self-hatred takes over our lives toxic
shame starts to heal and self-esteem
starts to build when we take the time to
understand ourselves and give ourselves
compassion around why all of these
patterns developed in the first place
when we learn to be patient with
ourselves around the areas where we're
still struggling and still building the
skills to navigate through and when we
have that compassion and that patience
with ourselves it is a lot easier to
find healthy people to be in
relationship with because if
relationships are about finding mirrors
we're going to be unconsciously looking
for people who mirror what's inside of
us back to us so people who have strong
compassion self-love a good
understanding of when it's time to be
firm with themselves and when it's time
to be gentle with themselves and those
are the things that they are going to be
bringing into relationship with us
because it's also what we know how to
offer and those are the types of
relationships where you get that really
strong support for working through the
process of healing your own
self-esteem which is something that
cannot be done exclusively through a
romantic relationship healing our
self-esteem is a long journey that
involves a lot of self-work and finding
mirrors in a lot of different places for
healthier relating but the important
part of doing that work is that it's a
journey of self-acceptance that happens
internally and that cannot be bestowed
upon us by another person so a secure
relationship might absolutely provide a
soft place for us to land well we doing
that work on our own and it might be
able to give us a lot of encouragement
along the way but it is definitely not
going to be swooping in and solving all
of our problems for us permanently so
that we never have to encounter the
things inside of us that we feel to be
disgusting or wrong about ourselves the
only way to heal our self-esteem is to
unpack all of that be willing to look
directly at it and find a way to give
ourselves compassion around it
that cannot happen if we are chronically
dissociating from it and living in a
world of fantasy connection so to
reverse this process what we have to be
willing to do is develop a deep sense of
intimacy with ourselves and this is
something I have a separate video on
that I will link in the description of
this video but to develop intimacy with
ourselves essentially means being
willing to stay present with ourselves
even in the moments when we are
disgusted with ourselves when we are
unhappy with ourselves when our lives
are not going the way that we would like
them to go it means failing to
dissociate from those moments and
deciding to show up for ourselves inside
of them instead and again being willing
to do that builds that basis of
self-compassion that allows us to start
choosing healthier Partners when we go
out into the dating world because we're
not looking for someone who's going to
ignore all of the parts of ourselves
that we dislike and unconsciously
collaborate with us on that idea that we
need to be perfect in order to receive
acceptance we're going to instead find
ourselves increasingly drawn to people
who know that they are not perfect and
who don't expect us to be either and who
are just willing to accompany us and
feel accompanied by us as we each work
on building the life that we want both
for ourselves and together so instead of
thinking romantic love love is going to
heal my toxic shame we start to
understand healing my toxic shame and
working with the parts of myself that I
most want to ignore and avoid is going
to be the very thing that opens me up to
healthy forms of Love Because deep
intimacy requires me showing the parts
of myself that right now toxic shame
might be hiding from me to other people
and allowing myself to be seen fully we
can only meet other people as deeply as
we've met ourselves right so that's
where the work has to start I think I'm
going to leave this here for today as
always let me know what you guys are
thinking feeling experiencing as you
watch this video I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again really
[Music]
soon