hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel I
want to do a deep dive into the
experience of toxic shame how it
develops and how it can lead to Chronic
difficulty regulating our emotions I
will put a link in the description of
this video to another one I've done that
goes over toxic shame what it is how to
recognize the signs of it in your own
life if that term is brand new to you
you can go check that out and then come
back here but for the rest of you who
are already familiar with this term what
we're going to do today is dive really
deeply into how toxic shame develops how
it builds on itself as it develops as
well as how it leads to Chronic
difficulties with emotional
regulation now the reason I feel really
passionately about this topic among
other reasons is because I think that a
lot of people who struggle with
emotional regulation issues tend to
think that the only way that can happen
is through having some very overtly
traumatic background so if on a
day-to-day basis I really struggle to
understand what I'm feeling to
communicate what I'm feeling to find
healthy coping mechanisms and outlets
for my feelings I might think something
terrible must have happened to me in
order for me to have arrived here and
while that absolutely can be the case
having various forms of trauma can and
usually do lead to emotional regulation
difficulties you don't have to have an
overtly traumatic past to have
difficulty recognizing and healthy
expressing your emotions a big factor
that can lead to the suppression of
healthy emotional expression is the
experience of having certain emotions
becoming shame Bound for you at a young
age which warps your ability to
experience those emotions directly it
also warps your ability to deal with
those emotions directly which leads to
Chronic
disregulation so today what we're going
to talk about is what it means to have a
shame bound emotion or multiple shame
bound emotions and how it can lead to a
wide variety of experiences both inner
and outer that compound the original
sense of shame we feel and make it
difficult to
self-regulate now to start us off I want
to be clear about what I mean when I say
the term toxic shame versus what we
might think of as is healthy shame so
when we look at the evolutionary purpose
of Shame what it's designed to help us
do in a very neutral way is alert us to
the fact that something we are doing is
likely to get us ostracized from our
social group so shame inside of a
healthy social environment actually just
helps us monitor our own behavior to
make sure that we're behaving
pro-socially if I get really angry at
someone in my kindergarten class and
then I kick them and then somebody
shames me for it I'm going to learn okay
the action of kicking is wrong I
shouldn't do it and then I'll
internalize that sense of shame in the
future and this is actually a pretty
good use of Shame it's an emotion that
kind of alerts us to the fact that it's
time to inhibit some Behavior or action
that we might want to take because it's
not going to help us behave pro-socially
now when we're experiencing toxic shame
shame is actually running counter to its
intended programming so rather than
helping us monitor our Behavior to keep
us in connection with others toxic shame
tells us that we are a mistake that our
authentic emotions are wrong not our
actions our emotions and so we believe
that we are the thing that must be
inhibited in order to keep ourselves in
connection with other people the problem
is that we are not in control of the
core emotions that we feel so if I start
to believe it's not the kicking that's
wrong it's the the anger that's wrong
now I'm on my way to developing toxic
shame because I can't control when anger
arises in my body all I can control is
how I choose to deal with that anger and
I can deal with that anger in more
pro-social ways or more antisocial ways
but the anger itself is a perfectly
normal and healthy emotion to have and
the entire gamut of core emotions that
we all experience are very important for
healthy psychological functioning so
those emotions are usually something in
the ballpark of anger sadness excitement
Joy disgust attraction or kind of moving
towards energy all of these things are
really important for us to feel on a
daily basis and all of them do arise
inside of our bodies on a daily basis so
if we somehow internalize the idea that
feeling one of these feelings is wrong
we're going to start to feel like we are
wrong because we can't control the fact
that we feel these feelings again all we
can control is how we handle them so in
order to start exploring how toxic shame
develops we're going to look at our
early experiences of co-regulation and
how they help us understand our own
inner experiences For Better or For
Worse so when we are very young we don't
yet have language for these emotions
that are chronically popping up inside
of us and it's the job of our parents or
our caregivers to help us get the ER
language for what we're feeling and also
help us understand how to express our
feelings properly so this is the process
of co-regulation when we're
co-regulating with someone we're kind of
showing somebody our insides in an
unfiltered way and we're receiving
feedback from them on how they're making
sense of our internal experience and
this is very important particularly When
We're Young because when I am 2 years
old and I don't know what this feeling
in my body is whatever name my parent
consistently gives that that feeling is
what I will come to know it as so this
emotion kind of Rises up inside of me
let's say it's sadness and my caregiver
looks at it and they go hey that's
sadness and now I have a name for this
feeling and already naming it might
start to change the feeling a little bit
maybe it feels kind of looser and I have
less anxiety around it just based on the
fact that it's being seen and
acknowledged and then in a healthy
caregiving environment the next step is
the caregiver tells the child here's
what we do when we feel sad so here are
some actions we can take in the real
world that will allow that emotion to
dissipate over time and then we return
to a state of Regulation your parent
goes hey I notice you feel sad when we
feel sad sometimes we cry sometimes we
reach out and talk to someone sometimes
we give ourselves a bit of a break and
then we also figure out how to do things
differently so we don't feel sad like
this next time we're in the same
situation so now what the child has is
both a proper name for their emotion and
a bunch of strategies they can turn to
for managing that feeling and this
becomes the way that we self-regulate as
we grow up so that child grows into an
adult who when they feel sadness popping
up is able to name for themselves hey
I'm feeling sadness right and already
that starts to change I guess I could
take a little break and have a cry I
guess I could go talk to a friend I
guess I could look at what led to this
feeling and figure out what I can do to
make sure that it doesn't happen again
like this in the future and now there
are these strategies that allow the
direct experience of the emotion to
dissipate and change and dissolve back
into a regulated state so this is how
early healthy co-regulation becomes a
clean and easy experience of
self-regulation as an adult secure
adults who have accurate names and
strategies for their emotions become
low-level disregulated several times a
day just like everybody does
but the difference is that they're
usually able to quickly identify with
their feeling and take the appropriate
actions to resolve or Express or change
that feeling and return back to a
regulated State now toxic shame enters
the scene initially when early
experiences of co-regulation go wrong
and this doesn't have to be malicious
often the reason that early
co-regulation experiences go wrong is
not necessarily because the parent was
abusive were terrible but because they
were just a little bit emotionally
illiterate themselves or there were
certain emotions that they didn't know
how to regulate through so it wasn't
possible for them to pass down the
accurate information to us and this can
be more than enough to turn certain
emotions into shame bound emotions so
we're going to look at how that process
develops when you have an emotion let's
say it's anger because I know anger is
one that a lot of people have shame
binds around if anytime that feeling
just naturally pops up for you as a
child your caregiver meets that feeling
with a sense of rejection so maybe they
look at you with disgust when you feel
anger maybe they show contempt towards
your anger maybe there's some way in
which they overtly reject you or ignore
you when you express anger now what's
going to happen is shame is going to
come online and it's going to go hey
I've noticed when we feel this feeling
it tends to lead to rejection so since
it's my job to inform you of which
things are going to lead to rejection
from your social environment anytime
anger pops up shame is going to pop up
too so the reason we call this a shame
bound emotion is because it's kind of
like the emotion itself is stuck inside
of a layer of shame we can't access it
because shame has come and covered it up
so effectively that we no longer feel
the core feeling itself and this is what
I would call a simple shame bind this in
and of itself is enough to develop toxic
shame because you're now feeling like a
feeling which is a core part of who I am
is wrong or bad a go I am wrong or bad
in ways I can't
control but simple shame binds are not
the only type of Shame binds you can
also have what I like to call a complex
shame bound emotion so this is what
happens when we're not only rejected for
feeling something in our early
environments we are also given the in
correct name for our feelings so let's
say when I have anger pop up my
caregiver tells me that's selfishness
what you are experiencing is a bad
feeling and it's the feeling of being
selfish and now when I have anger pop up
shame also pops up it binds it and it
tells me a story the story it tells me
is you are behaving selfishly which in
reality may or may not be true but the
problem is I have internalized the wrong
name for my raw emotional experience or
let's say every time I feel sad I have a
caregiver who tells me you're being
dramatic or pathetic and now when shame
pops up to cover that feeling of sadness
because it gets me rejected it tells me
the story you're being pathetic and
that's the story that my conscious mind
believes to be the truth or let's say
last one anytime I feel Joy or
excitement pop up I get told you're
being annoying and disruptive and now
shame comes to cover that and it not
only Cuts me off from the core feeling
it also tells me the story that I am
being annoying now the problem is that
all of these stories are not true to the
internal experience it's possible that
you can be angry and selfish at the same
time it's possible that you can be
excited and annoying at the same time
but the experience of behaving in an
annoying way is not the same as the
feeling of excitement the experience of
behaving in a selfish way is not the
same as the experience of anger but now
we've internalized these negative things
about ourselves and we associate them
with emotional states that we can't
control because again every person going
through their day-to-day life feels
pretty much all of the core emotions on
a daily basis it's just a matter of to
what degree we're tuned into them so the
problem is that if we have the wrong
words online for our emotional
experiences we're going to struggle with
self-regulation because now instead of
having this happen feeling comes online
I name it and then I find ways to deal
with it in the outside world until it
dissipates what happens is emotion comes
online shame comes to cover it up and
now we are feeling multiple things that
pose a problem one is the shame itself
shame is a very disregulated experience
so when we feel shame we tend to need to
comfort ourselves in some way around
that shame this in and of itself can be
a very big task for the emotional system
to chronically be dealing with but where
it gets even more complicated is if you
have a complex shame bound emotion so
sadness comes online and shame comes
online and goes hey you're being
pathetic now what you're going to do is
start taking actions that are in
alignment with what you believe the
emotion is
so if I am sad the actions that I would
take to resolve that emotion directly
are almost the polar opposite of the
actions that I would take if I were
being pathetic if I were feeling sad the
emotions I would need to take are
probably in the realm of seeking out
comfort and rest and support if I were
being pathetic the appropriate actions
to take would be toughening up
compartmentalizing my feelings and
taking some sort of action that pushes
down my feelings of distress the problem
is that if those are the actions I'm
taking every time I feel sad I'm
actually creating an environment that is
less comforting for myself airo my
sadness is getting bigger same goes for
let say anger if every time I am angry I
have shame come up and tell me the story
you're being selfish now what I'm going
to do is look around my environment and
try to figure out okay who do I need to
apologize to or fawn over when in
reality the anger was there to tell me
where I needed to set boundaries so what
I'm doing is inviting more of the energy
that caused me to get angry in the first
place into my life by taking
responsibility in the place of setting
boundaries so again because we have the
wrong name for our emotion we're taking
the wrong action when it comes up this
leads us to a point where we start
feeling chronically disregulated but we
don't have an explanation for why we
feel disregulated the real reason we
feel disregulated is twofold one we're
chronically dealing with feelings of
Shame which is a very emotionally taxing
experience but also we start to feel
incompetent when it comes to managing
our feelings because if we do not have
the right names for them we're not able
to resolve them directly so it can start
to feel like well my emotions just don't
make any sense right I keep experiencing
that feeling that I call selfishness and
then when I do the actions that should
work to resolve selfishness I end up
feeling worse and more selfish in a kind
of repetitive Loop because in reality
once again you have the wrong name for
that feeling so you're taking an action
that does not work to resolve it so now
we start to feel helpless and
overwhelmed to manage our emotions
because again we don't have access to
the raw direct experience of them in an
accurate way those emotions that we
don't express ress the anger that we
don't know we're feeling stays in our
bodies and our bodies stay angry the
sadness that we don't experience
consciously stays in our bodies and our
bodies feel sad and so now we have these
inner experiences of strong emotions
that we can't figure out or make sense
of but we still need to find a way to
emotionally regulate ourselves in order
to go on living our lives so we might
get fixated on whatever we can find mind
that makes us temporarily feel good if I
feel kind of chronically bad in ways
that I don't understand but I notice
that every time I eat a certain meal I
feel better for a little bit I might get
really fixated on what I'm going to eat
at all times because maybe that's the
only time where I have a brief sense of
comfort and reprieve from the shame and
disregulation that I feel all the time
or maybe I find that when I adhere to a
really specific and rigid schedule I'm
kind of able to emotionally regulate
around that
consistency I start to think of
emotional regulation as getting really
rigid about whatever it is that makes me
feel good because I don't understand the
cause and effect related to my own
feelings I don't understand that for
most people emotional regulation means
feeling all of your feelings as they
come up and then dealing appropriately
with them because it's impossible to
understand that if your feelings are
shame bound and you're not directly or
consciously experiencing your core
emotions the problem with this type of
self- soothing self soothing that is not
directly related or responding to the
emotions as they are rising in your body
is that it can create shame double binds
so what does that mean if the only way I
know how to regulate and give myself
some comfort around this mess of
emotions in my body that I don't
understand is to binge eat or to drink
by myself or to stick to a really rigid
and specific schedule all of these
activities could actually lead to social
ostracization because all of them fall
outside of the realm of what the average
secure person does to regulate their
feelings so this can actually create new
forms of Shame and this is where the
experience of toxic shame starts getting
complex this is what I call a shame
double bind I'm flooded with shame in my
system I don't understand why I assume
it's just some sort of flaw with who I
am I'm chronically disregulated because
I don't have a means of directly
resolving my emotions as they come up
and so I turn to compensatory emotional
regulation strategies like getting
really fixated on certain things that
are guaranteed to give me a momentary
reprieve from my shame but those things
in and of themselves can cause more
shame due to their consequences maybe I
stop liking the way that my body looks
or feels feel s because I'm chronically
eating or drinking to try to numb out
the shame and now I have new shame on
top of my original shame that my shame
management strategy has resulted in or
let's say I'm embarrassed about how
rigid and fixated I am on certain things
in my life and I don't want anyone to
get too close and to see how obsessive I
am about certain routines or habits that
I have and so now I have Shame about my
lifestyle so the thing that I'm trying
to do to escape my shame is actually
creating new forms of shame in my life
but without having access to what I'm
actually struggling with there's no real
way to make that cycle end so I can
start to feel as though I am just crazy
as though my emotions just make no sense
because I might be aware of the fact
that from the outside someone could look
at my life and go well if you're
struggling with these things with let's
say overeating or drinking too much or
being really rigid or obsessive about
something why don't you just stop doing
that
and because I don't know why I'm doing
those things in the first place I might
start to feel like well I just have
these Character defects I just have
these compulsions I don't understand
when in reality we just don't know how
to regulate around our core emotions
because we don't have access to them
because they have become shame bound but
by this point where we have shame
regulation strategies that are leading
to more shame probably what we're doing
is self-isolating quite a bit so we're
cutting ourselves off from co-regulation
because we're telling ourselves the
story my emotions don't make any sense
to me or to other people so if I tried
to show people what was up for me I
would probably just get shamed even
further for the fact that my behavior
makes no sense and I might get labeled
as things like lazy or weak or whatever
it is and that would just lead to more
shame so this is the point in the cycle
where shame becomes extremely
maladaptive because it's no longer
functioning to keep our authentic selves
in connection with other people the only
way at this point to stay in connection
with other people is to develop a false
self so a social Persona where you
pretend for short periods of time to be
a perfectly regular perfectly regulated
person and then when disregulation comes
online instead of staying present in
your connections and working through
that disregulation directly by working
things out with the other person or by
doing self-regulation strategies you
withdraw and turn to your maladaptive
coping mechanisms because that's the
only way you know how to deal with
disregulation because again you don't
have the language for what's actually
going on so one problem you're
chronically dealing with is the fact
that you're disregulated because the
emotions you don't have an awareness of
don't get dealt with and live on inside
of you and disregulated your system but
another problem is that your life stops
making a lot of sense and it gets really
hard to make wise decisions for yourself
because the shame bound emotions the
ones that you have learned to either
push down or misidentify were actually
there to give you really important
pieces of information and you are
missing those pieces of information if
you're not able to be consciously aware
of those feelings air go you're going to
really struggle with making decisions in
a way that makes sense so an example of
this let's say I have a shame bind
around anger as soon as I feel anger my
system pushes it right down and tells me
something like now it's time to feel
guilty or to Fawn now what might happen
is I might find myself in a pattern of
relationships where I am being spoken
down to or treated very poorly but
anytime anger tries to come up gets
pushed down and I go into an appeasement
response with my partner and I might be
absolutely baffled at why I keep ending
up in unhealthy relationship after
unhealthy relationship ship and the fact
that I can't seem to identify these
warning signs or notice in the moment
when things are going AR might become
another source of shame I might know
that from the outside it looks like I
just can't figure this out I just cannot
seem to find healthy Partners or end up
in healthy relationships and again I
might internalize that as a character
flaw there must just be something wrong
with me I let people walk all over me
when in reality I'm just not in touch
with the anger that is there to inform
me of the fact that my boundaries are
being crossed that anger is really
important for discernment when it comes
to choosing partners and navigating
relationships or let's say my system
immediately comes and hops on Joy or
excitement when I feel it and pushes it
down because I internalize that as if I
am excited and sharing it with people I
am being annoying and disruptive now I
might start feeling chronically
depressed and not understanding why I
can't motivate myself to just get up
figure out what I want out of my life
and go for it because that emotion of
excitement or lust or that moving
towards energy has been shame Bound for
me so I'm unable to take signals from my
own body about how to motivate myself
and which direction to move towards and
again I might just internalize something
like well I'm just a lazy piece of crap
I just don't try hard enough I just
can't seem to motivate myself like other
people can because there's something
wrong with me and those stories about
ourselves once again can lead to
withdrawing and to pulling away from any
forms of co-regulation because we
believe that if we showed ourselves to
someone else they would just go well why
don't you just do the obvious thing just
get up in the morning and do something
or just get out of that relationship and
find a better partner we can often see
the patterns that we're stuck in but not
what led us into those patterns and what
what would have to change in a given
moment when a pattern is playing out in
order for us to put a stop to it and
pivot in a New Direction so again we
start to tell ourselves an untrue story
about our inherently flawed nature that
story causes us to isolate further and
the more we isolate and the more we
don't allow ourselves to be seen and to
co-regulate with other people the more
we need comfort the more we need
connection and the more we turn right
back to those same maladaptive coping
mechanisms in order to soothe ourselves
in the absence of interpersonal comfort
and true deep
co-regulation so this is where we end up
in a really toxic Loop where we might
have no idea how to make the changes we
need to make in our lives because the
core emotions that we would need access
to in order to get out of this Loop are
inaccessible to us and the way that we
start to reverse this cycle is we learn
to get back in touch with those core
emotions and in order to do that we
probably need to work with what Alice
Miller who was a famous late
psychologist would call an enlightened
witness so an enlightened witness is
someone like a therapist an author
friend who's been through the rounds of
their own toxic shame who's able to give
you the type of language for your
experiences that you have lacked your
entire life and it's worth noting that
at this point in your life where you're
Bec becoming aware of this toxic shame
patterning you probably have much more
complex experiences than you did when
you were 2 years old so the type of
emotional co-regulation you need in
order to get back in touch with those
core emotions needs to come from someone
who has a much more advanced
psychological vocabulary which again is
why I think the best person for this job
is a really intelligent therapist not a
therapist who is going to treat your
symptoms and your symptoms only but a
therapist who is going to help you get
in touch with the core emotions that are
driving your neurotic or obsessive
patterns of thinking and behaving so the
first step in this process of reversing
this cycle of toxic shame is to take the
inner critic offline as much as possible
and learning to observe yourself as a
person who makes sense I really think
that the most isolating thought that
toxic shame leaves most of us with is
the idea that our feelings don't make
any sense when that is not true your
emotional experience itself in a raw way
is absolutely identical to the raw
emotions that come up for every single
person on this planet we all have the
same core emotions at the switchboard
the problem is that you got some wires
crossed you learn to name things
incorrectly or to suppress some things
for the good of fitting in into your
early caregiving environment and then a
whole bunch of things that we just
talked about snowballed out of that
original
miscalculation but the cool news is that
you are not inherently broken flawed
weird messed up or any of those things
you might be telling yourself at your
core you just developed compensatory
mechanism on top of compensatory
mechanism for trying to regulate
yourself when you did not have access to
skills that would help you regulate
directly so one of the first things it
can help you to start working through is
giving yourself some Grace understanding
and compassion around all of these
things that have developed as a result
of believing that one or more of the
core emotions that everybody has in this
world are inherently wrong and that you
are bad for feeling it if you can start
to understand how many things grew out
of that initial misunderstanding you're
going to be able to to give yourself a
lot more grace and stop thinking of the
patterns of behavior that you're ashamed
of as moral flaws and start seeing them
for what they are which is your best
attempt at coping within a system that
you once couldn't make sense of and the
next step that you're going to want to
work towards is getting back in touch
with those core emotions and slowly
removing the shame bind from them so
this can be done with the help of
someone like a therapist or a support
group who can help you have experiences
of those emotions directly without that
initial shaming environment so finding
places where you can express things like
sadness or anger or excitement or
attraction without being shamed in
response and the more we're able to do
this and the more we're able to get in
touch with those core emotions that we
have suppressed quite deeply for a lot
of us the more we're able to learn the
appropriate skills for resolving those
emotions so so someone like a therapist
can sit with you as you experience your
anger and help you figure out what the
appropriate actions are to take to
resolve that anger non abusively or they
can help you bring that sadness to the
surface and help you understand how to
move through it without getting stuck in
it and this is often a very long process
because again these feelings are often
very strongly repressed in us so it can
also take someone like an enlightened
witness of whatever form to let us know
things like hey you're saying that
you're feeling let's say sad or
depressed right now but your physiology
is very tense you actually look pretty
angry to me why don't we try that on for
size why don't we try moving into the
emotion of anger and just see how it
feels see if that feels more true or hey
I noticed that every time we get close
to this topic that it would be very
normal for you to feel grief around you
quickly change the topic and start
talking about something more upbeat I
want to see if we can go to that topic
and sit with that sadness for a little
bit and they're going to be able to help
you contain these emotions so that
you're now having the experiences you
didn't have as a child you learn this
feeling comes up we name it and we start
to find strategies for dissolving it and
integrating it into our lives so that we
can return to a state of emotional
regulation and now as the day goes on
every time a feeling comes up we're able
to recognize it eventually deal with it
appropriately and return to regulation
and this is how we eventually end up in
a state where we are self-regulated
adults there is no world where we just
don't feel anger sadness lust excitement
Joy all of these emotions that are core
to The Human Experience most of us
experience them daily and so if they are
shame bound and we're always pushing
them down calling them the wrong thing
and taking counter actions we are going
to be disregulated daily and it doesn't
mean that we necessarily had something
terrible happen to us it just means a
few things went wrong early on that
caused us to internalize the wrong idea
about our own emotions and that now on a
daily basis bring up this inability to
regulate around them this is what it
means to have toxic shame so the CO's
notes on reversing this process is that
we need to eventually get back in touch
with the core experiences of those
emotions what they feel like in our body
how to recognize when let's say anger is
rising up in me how to recognize the
difference between anger and selfishness
and how to work to resolve things
directly rather than sending them
underground into this convoluted system
of giving ourselves Comfort around the
wrong things where everything ends up
kind of coming out sideways and making
our lives harder and harder to navigate
this is the process of eventually
reversing that Dam downward spiral of
toxic shame and turning it into an
upward spiral of emotional literacy and
emotional competence all right I am
going to leave this at that for today
this has been a lot of information and
in the future we're going to break this
topic down into much smaller pieces and
start working with individual parts of
the shame healing process one at a time
because in reality that's what it looks
like this process does not get reversed
overnight it gets reversed through a
series of Tiny Steps that you take over
and over and over again over the course
of years as you work your way towards an
earned secure State as always let me
know any comments feelings questions you
have coming up in the comment section of
this video I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and your inner children and all their
little core emotions that arise and I
will see you back here again really
[Music]
soon