hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we talk
quite a bit about attachment Theory and
about any model that can help us
understand ourselves and other people
better as well as how we can work with
those models to get us more of what we
want out of our lives and our
relationships and less of what we don't
want
so today I want to talk about a not a
model but a term a construct that has
gotten super popular in the past 10
years which is the idea that
vulnerability is incredibly important in
fostering intimate close trusting
relationships now off the bat I want to
make it clear that I completely agree
that vulnerability is a really important
part of building trust and Intimacy in
relationships but I think it's also
possible for us to overdo vulnerability
so to be making ourselves too
susceptible to harm in our relationships
without doing enough self-protection
so this video is going to talk about how
to find the center point between making
ourselves vulnerable and kind of putting
ourselves in other people's hands
emotionally or practically speaking
and showing up for ourselves and
learning to be self-protective in
situations that call for it so I kind of
look at the distinction here as secure
vulnerability versus Reckless
vulnerability
because the term itself vulnerability
literally translates to being
susceptible to harm or attack
and this is not meant to be the end goal
in and of itself right when brene Brown
came out with all of her work on how
vulnerability helps us Foster intimate
relationships and closeness it was not
the act of making oneself vulnerable to
harm or attack that achieves that it's
what comes afterward it's when we learn
to put ourselves in situations where
that opening up and connecting with
another person is received in a way that
is mutually let's say vulnerable and
connecting and then it allows us to form
those deep bonds but it's not the act of
vulnerability itself that achieves this
end it's what comes after so sometimes
when we practice vulnerability in the
wrong scenarios it's actually going to
lead to negative results it might lead
to relationship ruptures so a lot of
what we're going to talk about today is
how to recognize when it's safe to
practice vulnerability when it's a good
idea and we're going to start by looking
at when it is not so here are some of
the signs that you might be overdoing
vulnerability at the expense of your own
self-protection and we're going to talk
in each case about how we can start
showing up differently so sign one that
you might be overdoing vulnerability is
that when you get hurt in an
interpersonal situation you're not
recovering in a reasonable time frame so
obviously there is no one way to tell
what a reasonable time frame looks like
when it comes to recovering from hurt or
pain or breakups or whatever it is that
has been painful for us interpersonally
but I think that a lot of us have a kind
of gut instinct around times when we
feel like we should be over something by
now but we're not and a lot of the time
if the thing that we're having trouble
getting over is a situation in which we
made ourselves vulnerable but did not
receive the response that we wanted or
maybe we're hoping for or maybe it was a
relationship that we chronically made
ourselves vulnerable within and we can't
seem to move on if this is the case for
you if you feel as though you have an
abnormally difficult time moving on
after showing your vulnerabilities it's
probable that you are Outsourcing too
much when you share yourself vulnerably
so what do I mean by that it might mean
that when you go into a situation where
you're sharing yourself with someone
when you are trying to make yourself
open and telling someone who you are you
are not just approaching the situation
in the present you are putting a lot of
meaning onto it so you might be telling
yourself I'm going to open up to this
person and instead of just telling them
the information I'm telling them and
noticing how they respond to that I'm
going to tell myself this story around
what it means about me as a person based
on how they receive this information
so if I tell someone about something
difficult I've been through and they
don't seem to care or I feel like
they're almost mocking me in response if
I've gone into that situation telling
myself I'm going to determine my worth
as a person based on how this person
responds to me that's going to take an
incredibly long period of time to
recover from because I've put so much
weight onto that one interaction or onto
a series of interactions with this
person
if I was only looking to open up to them
about one thing and they were to receive
it badly and I didn't put any additional
meaning onto them receiving it badly
other than this person doesn't seem to
be open to or interested in hearing
about this particular thing I'm
vulnerable about it still might hurt or
kind of Sting If you get the reply that
you weren't hoping for but it's not
going to absolutely Crush you because
you haven't built up this entire story
in your head about what else it means
and this is something that people do a
lot it can be difficult not to make
stories out of things not to project the
past onto our present but it's just
worth noting that if you feel as though
When You're vulnerable and open with
someone if it doesn't go the way you
want it takes you a really abnormal
length of time to recover from that or
maybe in some cases you feel like you
never really recover from it it's
probable that what's happening is you
are assigning too much meaning to your
vulnerable shares and getting yourself
stuck in a story that you can't work
your way out of so to combat this you
want to make sure that you are clear in
your own mind about exactly what you're
putting on the line when you're being
vulnerable with someone if you go up to
someone you have romantic interest in
and go hey I like you how do you feel
about me and they tell you oh you know I
don't really feel that way about you I'm
not interested in you in that capacity I
think of you more as a friend
if you are looking at things from a
secure perspective you're going to go
okay that's disappointing because I
wanted something to happen with this
person and now it's not going to happen
but if you are looking at this from an
insecure perspective if you are putting
all of these stories and layers of
interpretation on top of that
interaction now this person telling you
they just think of you as a friend might
mean something to you like I'm not good
enough I'm not worthy I'm not attractive
enough I'm not intelligent enough I'm
not someone who's ever going to find a
life partner and those are really big
heavy loaded stories that take a long
time to recover from
so if this interaction is triggering
those big deep Old Wounds it's likely
that the problem is you are assigning
too much weight to the situations in
which you're making yourself vulnerable
You're not just making yourself
vulnerable to one rejection you're
making yourself vulnerable to a
rejection of who you are as an entire
person and that is a huge thing to put
on one interaction
so to combat this what you need to do is
make sure when you're going into a
situation when you're going to be making
yourself vulnerable because it is an
important part of life you're getting
clear in your own head about what it
does and doesn't mean if the other
person does not respond the way that you
would hope so picture it going wrong
picture the other person rejecting you
or saying something cruel to you and
then notice in your own mind before the
interaction happens in real life what
stories come up when you imagine it
going badly
and then make sure you're taking care to
separate out those stories from the
reality of the situation before you have
the interaction in real life and if you
can't do that which is also okay maybe
it's not time to have that interaction
yet if you're really unable to detangle
the past and the present or your worth
as a person from the way that someone
responds to you in a single instance
it's okay to just recognize that and go
maybe right now it's not the safest time
for me to be practicing vulnerability
interpersonally because when I do that I
tend to put too much of myself on the
line so maybe it's time to take a break
do some self-work and figure out how you
can separate those things out so that
the next time you go into an interaction
where you're choosing to be vulnerable
you are not looking at it as this kind
of huge high-stakes life or death
situation you are just looking at it for
what it is sign two that you might be
overdoing vulnerability is that when you
are vulnerable with someone and this
applies specifically to using
vulnerability within established
relationships so whether that's a
romantic relationship a friendship a
family relationship you find that it
leads to an argument
so this is actually a really important
one to pay attention to if you make
yourself vulnerable and someone doesn't
respond in the way that you would hope
and you do not have the ability or
understanding of how to protect yourself
and comfort yourself around it going
wrong what's going to happen is you're
going to become panicked the second you
don't get the response you want and
you're going to try to elicit the
response you want out of the other
person by any means necessary so you
might try to shame them if you feel like
they haven't been empathetic enough you
might try to attack their character you
might try to exaggerate and heighten
what you were saying about your own
vulnerability until you find something
kind of extreme enough that they feel as
though they have no choice but to
respond in the way that you want and all
of those kind of tactics that might
unconsciously come online are signs that
you are going into situations where you
are doing vulnerable self-sharing
attached to the outcome rather than
committed to the process so when we are
committed to the process of vulnerable
sharing we go okay I see a reason for
myself to open up to someone I see a
reason why I want to share something
with someone but if they don't respond
in a way that is conducive to the
continuation of mutually vulnerable
sharing I'll stop because I know that
for this process to work if I'm trying
to get close to someone or if I'm trying
to expand my relationship with them they
have to be open to receiving what I want
to share and I have to be ready to
protect myself if things don't go the
way that I wanted them to so a secure
approach to vulnerability is going okay
I think that there's a situation in my
relationship that calls for me to be
honest and show someone where I'm
struggling or where my weak points are
or share with someone some sort of
thought process or emotional process
that is incomplete at this point which
might feel a little bit scarier
overwhelming for me to do
but if they don't respond well if they
shame me in response if they are cruel
to me in response if they shut down in
response and maybe need to take time to
themselves to process I have a backup
plan for what I will do I have friends I
know I can go to I have maybe a support
worker a therapist or some other
professional who I regularly meet with
who I know I can approach with whatever
type of emotion or maybe dysregulation
that comes up in response to me feeling
rejected and I can find ways to soothe
myself if this interaction does not go
the way I wanted I do not desperately
need to try to continuously make the
interaction go the way that I want I
have a plan B the insecure response to
getting rejected in the face of
vulnerability is to panic and try to get
the other person to behave the way they
want them to so to get better at
practicing that type of secure
vulnerability try literally writing out
a plan B for what you will do if you get
rejected when you share yourself
vulnerably or put down or otherwise have
some sort of negative outcome figure out
who will I go to maybe I have some
friends who I can let know I'm going to
do this vulnerable thing in my
relationship I'm going to open myself up
in some way and I'm not sure how it's
going to go if it goes badly would you
be available for a call tomorrow would
you be available to hang out with me for
the day on Thursday because I might need
a little bit of co-regulation have a
literal plan set up for what you will do
if things don't turn out the way that
you'd hoped and that way you take the
Panic the stress and the charge out of
each situation that you go into with
vulnerability because you don't need a
certain response from the other person
you will be okay either way sign number
three that you might be overdoing
vulnerability is that you tend to feel a
lot of resentment in your day-to-day
life and in your average experience of
relationships but you don't feel feel a
lot of anger so it took me a really long
time to learn that anger and resentment
are actually totally different things
anger stems from a self-protective place
so when we are angry with someone else's
Behavior it's our bodies and our minds
telling ourselves hey it's time to set a
boundary
I understand the way I don't want to be
treated I understand the types of
situations I'm not willing to let myself
interact with because it would be bad
for me and so I'm going to use my anger
as a means of setting boundaries and
making sure that I'm keeping myself okay
within those boundaries
resentment comes from a place of
self-abandonment when we resent someone
it means we don't make clear what we
want we don't set boundaries in place
and then getting angry at those people
for not intuitively knowing what we want
and setting our boundaries for us and if
we are projecting all of our boundaries
outward and looking to other people to
set them for us we are making ourselves
way too vulnerable right to think of our
boundaries as things that exist within
other people so things that other people
need to do ways that other people ought
to behave towards us so that we'll feel
okay that is putting ourselves in way
way too much Harm's Way there are so
many opportunities for that to go wrong
for us to be vulnerable to unnecessary
harm or attack for us to feel
chronically victimized when other people
put themselves first rather than us as
they should right in any healthy
relationship both people are putting
themselves first and then working
together to figure out what goals
they're going to accomplish as a Duo but
if we are making everyone else
responsible for setting our boundaries
for us we're going to feel chronically
resentful when they're not doing it
perfectly because nobody else could ever
be perfectly attuned to us nor would it
be healthy for them to try to be and so
all of this resentment can build up when
we are expecting other people to act in
a way that keeps us okay and when we are
expecting other people to act in a way
that keeps us okay we are being way too
vulnerable
and the antidote to this one is to use
our anger to figure out where we're not
showing up for ourselves where we are
not setting our own boundaries clearly
enough and then to make those boundaries
explicit A lot of the time when we go
into interactions thinking about how
we're going to display ourselves is so
hurt and vulnerable and wounded what
we're often neglecting is our own anger
we are mad that something happened we
are mad because there is a boundary
cross that maybe we hadn't made explicit
before but somewhere within that
vulnerability there is usually a sense
of neglected anger and most of us tend
to overdo one and under do the other so
we either over rely on anger at the
expense of vulnerability or we over rely
on vulnerability at the expense of anger
anger shows us where we end and another
person begins and vice versa so if we
are chronically using vulnerability and
showing our partners or our parents or
our friends how hurt and wounded we are
as a means of trying to get them to
change their behavior there is a high
chance that what actually needs to
happen is we need to get in touch with
our anger figure out where we are
chronically not setting boundaries for
ourselves and then set those boundaries
instead of trying to manipulate other
people into setting them for us by
acting chronically wounded sign number
four that you might be overdoing
vulnerability is that you chronically
feel kind of crazy or out of control in
romantic relationships or friendships or
family relationships essentially any
close interconnected relationship you
might have this sense of the other
person is way more in control than I am
and this is often a sign that we are not
using discernment about who to be
vulnerable with right vulnerability
across the board is not something we
should practice we do not live in a
world where every single person is a
good safe person to be vulnerable with
so when secure people are forming
relationships what they're doing is
noticing what happens when they are
vulnerable so if they share or disclose
something that's a little bit vulnerable
and the other person is very receptive
to that and they're able to maybe
respond in kind with something that's a
little bit vulnerable about themselves
then a little bit of trust gets built
and then the next time they have an
interaction with that person maybe
something a little bit more vulnerable
gets shared and maybe again the other
person responds in kind or maybe it's a
little bit more asynchronous but in
general secure people are always kind of
noticing and slowly building on
situations where reciprocal
vulnerability is happening
a big big pattern I notice an insecure
relationships is that those particularly
who from those who are a bit more
anxious will tend to be vulnerable with
people who do not behave vulnerably in
response and not think that that's a
problem
what happens in that scenario is you
begin to develop a vulnerability
imbalance so you have a relationship
where you are extremely vulnerable to
harm or attack and the other person is
not because they are not making
themselves vulnerable
and in such a situation it can become
borderline impossible for trust to
develop because trust involves two
people who are engaging with and
investing in each other in equal measure
but if you are using self-disclosure
over and over again in situations where
someone is either not receptive to
hearing and responding to it or where
they are uninterested in Sharing
themselves vulnerably with you you're
going to start to feel that in balance
and it's going to feel stressful
and if you were coming from a secure
standpoint you would note that imbalance
and it doesn't mean the other person's a
bad person it doesn't mean there's
anything wrong with them it just means
for whatever reason they are either
unwilling unable or uninterested in
sharing vulnerably with you and so
that's probably not a safe person for
you to be opening up to further that
doesn't mean you can't have a
relationship with them it just means
your relationship with them might need
to be a little bit more surface level
you might need to meet them where
they're at as opposed to trying to share
over and over and over again and hoping
that someday they will do the same in
response so in a healthy relationship
the vulnerability balance of the
relationship should be approximately one
to one that's not always going to be the
case and it's going to fluctuate based
on life situations of course but overall
both people should be approximately
equally vulnerable with each other
so just notice if the ratio is more two
to one for you let's say every two times
you open up to someone they open up to
you once that's just worth noting right
but if let's say every three times you
open up to someone they open up to you
once now you're kind of looking at an
overall pattern of imbalance in the
relationship and if it's much more than
that you're going to want to really flag
that in your head as someone who it
might not be possible for you to build a
healthy trusting relationship with
because you're just not on the same page
about this thing and again that's okay
you just want to make sure that you are
showing up in a self-protective way for
yourself and not putting yourself in a
situation where you're chronically
making yourself vulnerable to harm or
attack when the other person is not
doing the same air go trust can't be
properly built so this is all about
learning to use discernment about who we
get close to and we're gonna have to
note and be honest with ourselves in
this process if we tend to be very
attracted to people who do not show
vulnerability that in and of itself is
something that we need to work with
inside of us right because often if
we're attracted to people who show up as
very invulnerable who don't share much
about themselves what we're kind of
unconsciously looking for if we really
want to be close to that person is a
parent figure
parent figures When We're Young by
nature of the world they're in tend to
hide their vulnerabilities from us as
children because they're focused ideally
on meeting our needs and so when we grow
up chronically kind of with that wound
of I need to be reparented in some way
we might end up going for people or
feeling very attracted to people who
show no vulnerability
however that is the beginning of an
insecure relationship not a secure one
because if you're going in projecting
that you want this person to take care
of you and always be attentive to your
needs and have no needs of their own
that's going to create a really
unbalanced Dynamic for both of you
so again that's just something to note
and be aware of if you notice that you
actually get uncomfortable with a
partner being vulnerable with you to the
same extent That You're vulnerable to
them that's a sign that there's
something you need to work out there
maybe in therapy or in support groups
around what types of people you're
looking for and whether or not it's
actually a secure adult to adult Dynamic
that you're seeking out and the last
sign that you might be overdoing
vulnerability which we've already sort
of covered in the previous points but
which I want to make really explicit is
that you feel as though your
vulnerability isn't working
so numerous times mostly from those who
are a bit more anxious I've heard
something along the lines of I keep
making myself vulnerable and it keeps
not working
and I would like to contest that phrase
slightly because if you have put
yourself in a situation where you have
made yourself susceptible to harm or
attack by definition of the word you
have succeeded in making yourself
vulnerable
the other person does not have to
respond a certain way for your active
vulnerability to be a success if you
opened yourself up to harm or attack you
have been vulnerable it has been a
success does this mean you should always
do it no absolutely not right there are
a lot of cases where vulnerability is
not the appropriate choice if I were to
go out camping in a region where there's
a whole bunch of grizzly bears and I
leave my food lying around the campsite
and then I pass out I'm making myself
incredibly vulnerable I'm incredibly
susceptible to harm or attack but that
doesn't mean that I should have done
that that doesn't mean my vulnerability
is a good thing but I have succeeded in
making myself vulnerable right the only
way to fail at vulnerability is to not
do it is to share something in a way
that is dishonest or that doesn't
genuinely open you up to True feedback
from another person but often what I
hear people implicitly saying when
they're saying that their vulnerability
doesn't work is that their vulnerability
is not getting them close connected
relationships which is their secret end
goal in being vulnerable so they are
looking at vulnerability as a means to
an end rather than an end in itself
now this raises the question of why
would vulnerability be an end in itself
and that is something that I think is
incredibly important to explore why
would we want to put ourselves in these
situations where we're susceptible to
harm or attack there are some good
reasons one is because it's hard to
learn anything in a state where we are
not open to being wrong where we are not
open to having our minds or opinions
changed so vulnerability can be a
wonderful learning tool in the right
situations
vulnerability can also help us align our
inner and outer worlds and a lot of the
time that can be a phenomenal end in and
of itself if I have been withholding
something I really want to say if I feel
as though I am lying to or pretending
around a certain person and I just want
to clear the air and let them know what
my actual internal experience is without
an attachment to how they will respond
that's a situation that's probably going
to naturally result in me being a little
bit more vulnerable but the end goal
there is to feel aligned internally and
externally so no matter how this person
responds no matter how they interpret it
even if they interpret it very
negatively and have something very
rejecting to say in response I at least
know that I have shown up for myself and
been honest about what I'm thinking or
feeling or experiencing and now I don't
have to feel like I am living this kind
of double life anymore like I am saying
one thing and feel another and that's
the type of situation you want to go
into with a plan B established for what
happens if you do get rejected or shamed
or hurt in the process of being
vulnerable and so to combat that feeling
of my vulnerability doesn't work I would
encourage you to get really in touch and
specific with yourself about why you are
being vulnerable in the first place and
if the answer is to elicit a certain
reaction out of somebody you are using
vulnerability in a bit of a manipulative
way right
instead of directly asking for what you
want you are trying to change the way
the other person is feeling or thinking
so that they give you what you want
without having to ask for it and if that
is your secret end goal with sharing
vulnerably you are going to feel like
your vulnerability doesn't work a lot of
the time right vulnerability is a great
tool but if you try to approach every
situation with it you're going to end up
in a lot of situations where you are
using a hammer when you need a
screwdriver and you need to be able to
use discernment to figure out which
situation is which when is it good for
you to be open and vulnerable and share
yourself with someone authentically
versus when is it actually a better move
for you to be self-protective for you to
reel it in a little bit for you to learn
to deal with whatever it is that you're
feeling in a different way or with a
different person so the point of all of
this is that vulnerability is not a bad
thing it's not something we need to do
away with it is a really important tool
for building trust intimacy and
closeness in relationships we just need
to make sure we are using it in the
right way at the right times and for the
right reasons and this is an ongoing
process of discernment that we will need
to use pretty much daily in our close
relationships right and it can just
involve taking that pause and going is
this the right thing to do right now and
why am I doing it and what will I do if
it doesn't turn out the way that I hoped
that is how we go from practicing
Reckless vulnerability to secure
vulnerability and ideally all of our
relationships get healthier as a result
of us developing that discernment all
right that is all that I have to say for
today on this topic as always let me
know what's coming up for you guys as
you listen to this what your thoughts
feelings perspectives are in the
comments section below and until next
time I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and your inner
children and each other and I will see
you back here again super soon
[Music]