hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here on this channel we talk
about different models and different
methods for understanding ourselves and
other people in order to get more of
what we want out of our lives and our
relationships and less of what we don't
want and today what I want to talk about
specifically is codependent
relationships and some of the unhealthy
or distorted thought patterns that we
may have developed and internalized from
a very young age that make it difficult
for us to understand what a healthy
relationship looks like so when it comes
to attachment wounding developmental
relational trauma anything that gets in
the way of us relating directly and
authentically to other people I think
that there's often a couple different
sides to a problem one is that we may
not have had an example growing up of
what a healthy relationship looked like
so we didn't have the opportunity to
observe and internalize secure
attachment skills which I call not into
internalizing the right thing right
there's a knowledge Gap around what to
do and I think that if that's the only
challenge we're working with when it
comes to building healthy relationships
it's a little bit easier to correct the
problem because as soon as we get those
examples as soon as we're in
relationship with secure others it can
feel fairly straightforward to start
internalizing that behavior but a lot of
the time the problem runs much deeper
than just not having internalized the
right thing because often in the absence
of the right or secure thing we also
actively internalize the wrong thing as
the right thing and if you've been
around this channel for a while you know
that I don't love using the words right
and wrong in relation to Human
Relationships I prefer to talk about
what you want and what you don't want
and how to get more of that so I just
want to make it clear that in this case
when I say the right thing versus the
wrong thing I'm using the right thing as
a placeholder for the more secure thing
to do and the wrong thing is the more
insecure and that's not to say that
those things are inherently good or bad
bad it's just to say that if our end
goal is healthy secure relationships
we're going to want to internalize as
much of the secure thing as possible and
be as aware as possible of when we're
behaving from a more insecure place so
when we internalize the wrong thing as
the right thing what I'm going to call
that throughout the remainder of this
video is a thought Distortion so some
area in which what we have learned or
internalized to be loving and secure and
healthy in relationship is actually
getting us less of the secure Dynamic
that we're looking for and without going
any further into that we're going to
jump right into five thought distortions
that I personally had to work my way out
of in order to understand the difference
between a codependent relationship and a
healthy secure relationship so all of
these are taken from personal experience
but I wanted to share them in case
anyone else is still actively in the
thick of these thought distortions and
might benefit from having another
perspective offered so without further
Ado thought Distortion number one that
might lead us to internalizing a
codependent pattern of thinking and
behaving as a secure one is the
distorted belief that to love someone
means to save them from the consequences
of their own actions so if you grow up
with early enmeshment or in a
codependent family unit you may have
learned love means rushing in the moment
someone regrets one of their actions and
kind of savioring that situation so that
they don't have to feel the pain of what
they have done now every once in a while
is this a loving thing to do sure
however there is a point where saving
someone from the consequences of their
own actions becomes enabling nobody ever
really deeply learns anything until they
are present with the consequences of
what happens and so if someone we love
has gotten themselves in a mess and we
are swooping in to save them from the
consequences of that mess before they
have the chance to really understand
what damage that mess caused for
themselves in other people what we are
robbing them of is the opportunity to
learn and grow from their mistakes
of course this does not mean we have to
leave people completely alone when
they're struggling but what it does mean
is that we don't want to rush in too
quickly to right or wrong that someone
else has created for themselves if we're
doing that there's often a slight air of
selfishness about it maybe we want the
other person to see us as a little bit
of a hero maybe we want them to be
impressed with how much we can help them
maybe we feel like we're developing a
reciprocal relationship where each of us
helps each other clean up our messes
when in reality a healthier more secure
Dynamic would be one in which we
supported each other in feeling the
consequences of our own actions cleaning
up our own messes and allowing ourselves
the opportunity to learn from our
mistakes emotional pain has a purpose
emotional pain is there to alert us to
our nose it shows us when we have
reached a limit or behaved in a way that
causes harm to ourself or other people
we need to feel the consequences and the
pain of our actions in order to learn
and to change for the better and if we
are swooping in every time someone makes
a mistake cleaning up their messes for
them and denying them the opportunity to
feel and learn where their nose are we
are denying them the opportunity to grow
and sometimes it just helps to make that
really explicit internally and even
externally because it feels
uncomfortable to watch someone we love
struggle right so just naming that
inside of ourselves when we want to rush
in and caretake someone else can I take
a moment with myself and go oh I feel so
uncomfortable allowing this person to be
in pain in my presence I really want to
rush in and caretake them or I really
want to rush in and solve this problem
for them and I'm owning that a large
part of that is kind of for me and maybe
I can even let them know that hey I see
you're really struggling and I really
want to rush in and kind of take your
pain away in any way that I can but I'm
going to acknowledge that that's not my
pain to decide what to do it so I want
you to know that I care a lot about you
and I'm here to support you and talk to
you as you navigate through this but I'm
not going to act on that part of myself
that wants to fix this for you and that
isn't always a conversation that it's
appropriate to have with someone but at
least being able to own that in
ourselves can help us stay much more
aware of what we're trying to do and why
is it really because we want to help the
other person when we try to take away
someone's distress or more often than
not is it that we feel uncomfortable
watching someone be in distress and so
we're robbing them of the opportunity to
learn and grow from their mistakes
thought Distortion number two that might
lead you to believing codependency is a
healthy model of relating rather than
security is the belief that it is unkind
to express anger or discontent or to
otherwise let someone know when they
have hurt you if you believe that they
didn't mean to or there's some reason
why they hurt you that they aren't in
control of so this can very often be the
case if let's say you grew up in a
family where you have a parent who has
mental health issues or other challenges
on their plate and you learn to do that
exoneration process in order to keep
yourself in connection you may have
learned to tell yourself something along
the lines of if someone doesn't intend
to hurt you it's unkind to let them know
that they did in reality once again this
is not true in the long run in the long
run it is not kind to warp reality for
other people in order to protect their
feelings because if we do not have
access to reality and to the real impact
that we are making on other people we
don't know how to fix the ways in which
we're habitually showing up in a way
that hurts other people and so we don't
know how to stay in real close
connection with people it often feels
really nice in the moment to warp our
internal reality a little bit when we're
talking to someone else to make them
feel better but in the long run all
we're doing is giving them inaccurate
information that they're going to go
ahead and base their future decisions on
because that's how learning works and
it's important to note here that the
opposite of this is not to tell someone
they're a monster or a terrible person
or take something they've done wrong and
make it seem like it's a giant
unsolvable character flaw for them it
can be as simple as kind of slowing down
in a conversation and going hey I notice
that I'm feeling kind of defensive right
now and I think that feeling of
defensiveness started coming online when
you started using this particular tone
or when you said X Y or Z or hey the
last time we were hanging out I left
feeling a little uncomfortable like
there was something about the way that
we were connecting that fell off to me I
don't really know what it is and it's
not necessarily a huge deal but I just
wanted to put it out there and maybe we
can work together to figure out what's
going on or we can just kind of leave
that question open for a while but I
just want you to have all the
information that I have about what's
alive for me inside of our dynamic or
hey I'm noticing some resentment is
starting to build for me around this one
particular area of our relationship and
I want to bring that up because I don't
want that to be in the way of feeling
close to you I really like when we feel
close and connected and so I want to see
if maybe we can work together to find a
creative solution to this if the only
ways of resolving conflict that we ever
had modeled to us were avoidance of the
conflict or direct personal and frankly
kind of mean attacks on other people's
character we're probably going to
default most of the time to the former
because it's what keeps us in connection
but there's a way to stay in connection
without attacking someone's character
and without neglecting our own
experience of the relationship and it's
simply being honest about what's alive
for us when we're in connection with
someone else and giving that other
person the opportunity to see clearly
what impact they're having on us and
what they do with that information from
that point is completely up to them but
at least we know we have done our part
in allowing them to see reality exactly
as it is which in the long run is one of
the kindest things we can possibly do
for another person if we really care
about their growth how health and
development as a human being so I like
to remind myself that overtaking
responsibility particularly in
relationships with people who tend to
undertake responsibility or who tend to
really struggle to understand what their
responsibility is as an adult it's kind
of like handing an alcoholic drink to an
alcoholic and going there's no alcohol
in this we're deceiving them by not
being honest if I'm apologizing and
saying things were all my fault when I
kind of know things were not all my
fault and I only really want to take
responsibility for what was now I'm
conspiring and creating this false world
for this other person where they don't
really understand where it's important
for them to take responsibility and
start behaving in more pro-social ways
now this doesn't mean that I sit them
down and give them an intense lecture on
all of the things they're doing wrong it
just means I'm honest about the ways in
which they're affecting me and the
emotions that are arising in me when I'm
in relationship with them so that they
can have accurate information about
what's happening right I'm not saving
their ego at the expense of their
awareness of reality Ergo their mental
health Distortion number three that can
often lead us to believing codependent
patterns of behavior are secure ones is
the belief that closeness means being
the same as someone else and not
deviating from them in any major way
particularly if you grew up in a family
that had a lot of enmeshment you might
have this core belief that in order to
be close to someone you have to at any
cost emphasize the ways in which you
think the same things as them believe
the same things as them have the same
interests as them and you have to shove
all of the parts of yourself that are
different from that other person away
and where I see this one tripping people
up the most is in romantic relationships
because in reality a lot of what
attracts us to other people and
intrigues Us in relation to other people
is the ways in which we're different so
a lot of the time particularly for those
who are more anxious I see this pattern
playing out of them meeting someone and
kind of getting interested in them and
then often without even realizing
they're doing this kind of shoving aside
all of the parts of themselves that
differ from this other person and Hyper
emphasizing and focusing on all their
similarities and in a lot of cases also
pretending that they're similar in ways
that they're really not and as soon as
you're doing that your authentic
self-expression is gone and there's
nothing really there for the other
person to be intrigued by or excited by
and so that's often the point where
attraction starts to naturally fade for
the other and of course a certain degree
of sameness is important even necessary
for close relationships but the secure
version of this worldview is an
understanding that a certain level of
sameness is healthy in a relationship
but so is a certain level of difference
and it's those ways in which you are
different and in which you're able to
both stand strong in your differences
that keeps the sense of Attraction and
Intrigue alive in relationships as well
as the thing that keeps you learning
from each other right if we meet someone
who believes everything we believe
thinks everything we think and feels
everything we feel we don't really have
a lot of growing to do within that
relationship we learn through having our
thoughts and beliefs and feelings
contrasted and then figuring out what
exists in the in-between that's a lot of
the fun parts of getting to know someone
and the other thing I want to point out
here is that in a lot of ways it's
actually kind of unkind to hide
ourselves from other people when they're
genuinely invested in getting to know us
because if we are hiding major parts of
who we are what we want what we value
and what's important to us in life and
we're pretending that we have a
different set of values and interests
than we actually do we can't hide those
things forever eventually the truth will
come out and now this other person may
have spent a lot of time and emotion and
energy getting invested in what was kind
of a false promise it's a lot nicer to
be upfront with people about what we
actually think feel believe value and
want out of our relationships than it is
to hide the things that are
non-harmonious with them and then let
them Discover It years down on the road
when most of the decisions that they've
made about the relationship has been
based on false information so to be
honest with people up front and direct
about who we are and what matters to us
requires a sense of inner security a
sense of knowing it's okay if this other
person doesn't like parts of me that
might just mean we're not the right
people for each other and if that's the
case what a gift it is to know that up
front rather than discovering it years
down the line when we keep getting into
the same conflicts over and over and
over again because one or both of us is
in the habit of not being totally honest
learning to not take things personally
and to understand that being different
from someone in a way that might be
incompatible for a close relationship
does not make us morally bad people is
often a really big learning curve for
those of us who grew up insecurely
attached but learning that lesson allows
us to have much more secure Dynamics
right from the get-go because our
relationships start having honest
premises which gives them infinitely
better chances at succeeding thought
Distortion number four that can lead us
to internalizing codependent patterns as
healthy ones is the belief that falling
out of connection with someone in any
given moment is an emergency that needs
to immediately be solved in order for
you to remain close I have a video about
this that I will link in the description
of this video it's specifically related
to anxious attachment as those who air
anxious tend to be the ones who struggle
the most with moments of Disconnect in
relationships but it's applicable to
anyone what the video talks about is the
importance of taking space and
recognizing your differences in building
Intimacy in order for two people to feel
close they have to be clear on where
their boundaries are and the ways in
which they are not the same so when we
arrive at those moments of either
conflict or differences of opinion with
someone this can actually be a really
great opportunity to pull back a little
bit do some reconnecting to ourselves
into great the ways in which we're
different from this other person and
what we've learned from that interaction
where maybe our thoughts or our beliefs
or our values clashed and spend some
time asking ourselves with this new
information what do I think and believe
and want how does this land with me and
the clearer we can get on that when
we're in those periods of Separation
with another the more authentic we can
be when we do come back into connection
because instead of immediately fawning
in order to get back into a false
connection we're really taking the time
to connect back to ourselves see the
other from a new vantage point and then
let them know our honest thoughts and
feelings and beliefs about whatever
happened in those moments of conflict
and this process of feeling super close
and connected experiencing conflict
reconnecting to the self on both sides
and then coming back into connection
with an increased awareness of the other
and an increased understanding of what
matters to ourself and the other person
allows that coming back together process
and that re rebuilding of intimacy
happen on a much deeper and more
meaningful level so this belief that
falling out of connection for even a
moment in time is an immediate emergency
that needs to be solved is a big part of
what leads us to Fawn or apologize for
things we're not really sorry for or
whatever it is that keeps that
codependent cycle going insecure
Dynamics conflict and disagreement are
major and necessary parts of that
intimacy building process it helps you
sort of sort out that Venn diagram of
what's me what's them and where is the
overlap rather than trying to make that
thing a circle which once again leads to
a non-dynamic relationship where one or
both parties is just not learning that
much because reality is being ignored
and the last thought Distortion we're
going to talk about today that can lead
to the development of codependency in
place of secure relationships is the
belief that love means anticipating
other people's limits and not ever
expecting more of them so making it
decision in our minds that this person
just isn't that emotionally mature or
they wouldn't be able to handle it if I
told them that they hurt me or maybe
there are these inherent character
traits that we just decide are part of
someone's personality and we resign
ourselves to working around those things
forever even if they're getting in the
way of connection now I want to be clear
the opposite of this is not changing a
person it's not going up to someone and
going you need to do everything
differently and you need to change your
entire personality to accommodate me but
a big part of what secure love is is
giving the other the benefit of the
doubt and the opportunity to rise to the
occasion in emotionally challenging
moments so what that means is instead of
writing somebody off and going I'm going
to do 200 of the work here because I
believe that they're not capable of
meeting me where I'm at choosing to let
them know exactly how you see things
from your side of the fence and offering
them the opportunity to work with you as
a true equal in order to solve problems
in your relationship maybe they truly do
lack the skills that you're anticipating
them lacking however maybe you offering
them the opportunity to work with you to
solve certain problems is going to be
the thing that inspires them to finally
learn that skill and to grow in that
direction but if you just assume from
the get-go this person isn't capable of
X Y and Z so I'm just going to
compensate and do double the work for
them you're not even giving them the
opportunity to rise to the challenge of
doing something differently and a
relationship that is truly loving and
secure usually involves two people
learning from each other and giving each
other opportunities to rise to new
occasions with the care and support of a
loving secure forgiving connection
available to them in the process so to
recap insecure relationships one we
offer people the opportunity to learn
from their own mistakes and to support
them emotionally in that learning
process two we show Love by giving
people accurate feedback about the way
we feel in our connection to them three
we're honest about the ways in which we
differ from the other person and ideally
we learn and grow through those
differences four we use periods of
conflict and disconnection as
opportunities to reconnect to ourself
and to build long-term intimacy through
an awareness of each other's boundaries
and differences and five we give people
the opportunity to rise to the occasion
of loving us in a way that preserves our
dignity as well as theirs so instead of
erasing ourselves in order to cater
completely to the other we stay firm in
who we are and give the other the
opportunity to do the same and if
there's areas where our differences get
in the way of us having a healthy
relationship we talk those things out
and find Creative Solutions together
that is what a secure properly
differentiated relationship is made of
it requires neither person
self-abandoning on a regular basis
because as soon as we're doing that the
truth is going out the window and a
secure relationship needs to be built on
a foundation of honesty and mutual
respect all right that's all I have to
say for today on the difference between
a codependent and a secure relationship
and some of the thought distortions that
may have led us to internalize one as
the other as always let me know in the
comments what's coming up for you guys
as you're watching this video I love you
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and I will see you back
here again really soon
foreign
[Music]