hey guys hedy preeb here welcome to my
channel if you're new welcome back if
you are not new today i am doing kind of
just a freeform speaking video where i
wanted to talk about something that i've
been thinking about a lot over the past
week or so
so
first thing i want to get out of the way
is that i cannot say the word red
properly i sound like i am from texas
and also like backwoods canada at the
same time every time i say that word and
whenever i say it people are like oh it
must be a canadian thing and i'm like no
no it's not i just for whatever reason
have an accent when i say the specific
words red and bad but if i'm not
thinking about it i can say and i'm not
going to be able to do it properly now
because i am thinking about it but i can
be like oh yeah i read that book and it
will sound perfectly normal so if i have
any like speech path followers please
let me know what that's about and how i
can fix it but in the meantime we are
going to be talking today about red
flags and kind of the narrative we have
around red flags versus green flags and
something that i think we don't talk
enough about which is the fact that we
try to approach red flags and green
flags from this incredibly objective
place right like we make lists of things
that are red or green flags in terms of
people's behavior and i don't think that
that is useless information like i don't
think that we shouldn't be on the
lookout for certain things that stick
out as kind of objectively bad or
inconsiderate behavior but i think that
we also can be too cognitive when we
talk about red flags especially if you
air a little bit more on the avoidant
side of things you can miss a lot of red
flags because you are not tuning into
your internal experience and you can
excuse behavior that is actually
impacting you quite negatively because
on paper it might not be something that
you think would be objectively bad i was
30 years old it was this year of my life
when i had this kind of aha moment for
the first time that red flags and green
flags are personal things and for some
of you that might be completely obvious
and you can feel free to turn off the
video now but if that is news for anyone
else i encourage you to keep watching
because i want to talk a little bit more
about what it means to recognize what's
a red flag for you even if it's not in
objectively bad behavior and how you can
start tuning into that feeling in your
body so that you can recognize when
something is not going to be conducive
to the continuation of a relationship
for you even if for someone else it
might be completely benign so what this
is is a process of learning to trust our
inner signals as opposed to just kind of
objective external standards that
society or other people have decided are
good or bad red flags are not just about
objective qualities they're about how
people make us feel and how we make
other people feel and i think that it
also helps us take people out of these
kind of categories that we like to place
them in and think about the interactions
that we have with people more so than
just labeling people as like good or bad
or toxic or non-toxic and truly thinking
about what we need and bringing that
center of focus back to ourselves which
is the only place we can really do any
true work from so the way that i like to
think of red flags at this point in my
life is how do i feel around this person
so when i check in with my body in
interactions with this person or when i
think about this person what do i feel
in my body do i feel calm and grounded
and content or do i feel insecure or
anxious or avoidant and any of the
latter half of those feelings for me are
a red flag even if the thing that they
are doing is in theory benign and i'm
gonna explain a little bit more about
what i mean by this so i'll give some
examples so some of the red flags i'm
starting to notice i have when it comes
to close relationships of any sort are
one i don't feel naturally affirmed by
this person and this could be absolutely
no fault of the person in question right
it could be a mismatch in love languages
so for example i am a humongous quality
time person it is without question my
love language when someone wants to
spend a lot of time with me when they
initiate plans with me when they
prioritize doing things together and
spending time together i feel incredibly
loved i feel like i understand on a very
deep very natural and easy level this is
a person who cares about me and if i
naturally want to give that time and
attention and energy back to someone i
know that that's someone i care about as
well that is what love feels like to me
whether it's platonic romantic whatever
people who want to prioritize time
together but someone who doesn't
prioritize quality time who maybe has it
as their last love language might think
that them doing lots of little acts of
service for me or them giving me gifts
or them giving me words of affirmation
is showing love and they might be a
hundred percent correct
but because quality time is so huge for
me it would be a very big leap i would
have to constantly cognitively remind
myself this is that person showing love
this is the way they do it it's not the
way i do it but it's what they're trying
to give to me but i wouldn't really feel
that love in like a deep somatic way
inside of my body i would have to do a
lot of mental gymnastics to remind
myself and to really feel like i'm loved
and appreciated and valued by that
person and vice versa and so for me
someone who doesn't value quality time
is a red flag and it's okay for that to
be a red flag it doesn't mean that
they're a bad person they might be an
absolutely wonderful person who would be
the perfect partner for someone else who
has a more similar way of showing love
right but if i'm not allowing myself to
see that mismatch as a red flag for me
personally i might be able to talk
myself into a relationship with someone
where it's just always going to be more
work than it's worth where it would be
easier to just let it go and let us find
partners or friends or whatever it is
who more naturally align with each other
so not valuing that quality time not
being proactive about making plans not
wanting to spend tons of time together
even if the person shows love in tons of
other ways that is and is allowed to be
a red flag for me personally because the
way it makes me feel internally is
always a little bit confused and
uncertain about where i stand with that
person and i don't want to feel like
that that is not the way that i care to
feel in relationships ergo that is my
personalized red flag despite the fact
that it's not an objectively bad quality
okay and it's okay to just prioritize
people who show love in the same way
that we do another red flag of mine is
if someone just doesn't like talking
about the same things that i like
talking about right we spend so much of
our time on this earth just analyzing
life with the people we care about with
our partners with our friends with our
family members and if someone does not
like the fact that i love to talk about
psychology that i love to talk about
human perspectives that i like to be
really analytical and philosophical
about things there is nothing wrong with
not wanting to talk about those things
but someone not wanting to talk about
those things means that i'm always going
to feel a little bit inhibited around
them and that feeling of inhibition in
my body does not feel good it feels kind
of tense it feels frustrating it feels
like my energy is kind of trapped and
again i can feel this way around a
person who is perfectly lovely perfectly
wonderful an extremely considerate
friend or partner but i don't like that
feeling of inhibition in my body i don't
like when i feel like i can't express
myself or talk about what i want to talk
about around people so when i feel that
feeling as long as i can be reasonably
sure that it's a true barrier in the
relationship as opposed to me holding
myself back i just call that a red flag
for myself because again i wouldn't be
able to get what i would need out of
that relationship in a comfortable and
easy way and that's allowed to be one of
my personal red flags even though there
might be nothing wrong with what the
other person is doing and the last one
and this is one that i think we do not
talk nearly enough in the attachment
community or in the overall world of
dating in relationships if i do not feel
good enough for someone that is a red
flag for me now lots of people would say
that's a self-esteem issue there is no
such thing as better or worse than other
people there's no such thing as leagues
and there is definitely an element of
truth to all of that right i believe
that we are just people we are just
connecting with each other and there are
people we connect better and worse with
but this is one that i kind of tried to
fight myself for a long time and i
thought it was like a limiting belief
like if there are certain people where i
was like ooh i always feel a little bit
inferior around that person i always
feel a little bit not good enough to be
around them or to be considered by them
in some way i thought that must be a me
thing that must be a thought that i just
have to get over because i'm projecting
that onto the other person and that may
very well be true right this could be a
complete and total projection for me
however if there is something in me that
is so unhealed that i cannot stop myself
from projecting it onto someone else
consistently that's probably not going
to be the healthiest relationship so in
this case it's very possible the red
flag lives inside of me and i'm just
noticing that feeling but it's still
there and it's still a red flag i don't
want to feel not good enough for someone
who i want to form a close relationship
with and the other thing to keep in mind
here is that often when we feel not good
enough what we're picking up on is
actually a values difference right so
when i'm around people who put a really
heavy value on let's say aesthetics and
how they're showing up physically there
is absolutely nothing wrong with that we
live in a world of beautiful people and
we should absolutely celebrate our
beauty but because i don't place as much
of an emphasis on that i'm constantly
reminded when i'm around people who
value that that i don't value that and
that in order for us to really connect
there would have to be some sort of
reaching into each other's values and
that feels difficult and straining a lot
of the time and again that doesn't mean
it's never worth it it doesn't mean that
if there's one or two value differences
that means throughout the whole
relationship but if being around a
certain person persistently makes you
feel like you are not attractive enough
funny enough smart enough interesting
enough whatever it is there's probably
something in that dynamic that you're
picking up on that isn't going to be
healthy for you to continue to engage
with in a very involved way and that in
and of itself is reason enough to give
yourself permission to take a step back
maybe you really are picking up on
subtle judgments that that person is
making of you or maybe that person isn't
judging you at all you're making those
judgments about yourself and you're
projecting them onto them but in either
case it doesn't really matter because at
the end of the day the feeling that you
end up with is insecurity and feeling
insecure in a relationship is not the
way you want to feel it doesn't give you
a healthy breeding ground for
vulnerability for connection for
authenticity and you need those things
to build a healthy relationship so if
you've identified the problem is
probably me that's fine you're allowed
to just take a step back from that
relationship you don't have to cut the
person out you don't have to make it
dramatic you can just acknowledge i need
to take a few steps back from this i
need to do some work on my own stuff so
that that issue is no longer coming up
for me in this relationship and i'm no
longer projecting it onto that person
and you can see where you go from there
and with all of these that's the thing
right sometimes the way you feel around
a person is negative because they are
saying or doing or acting towards you in
a way that's not respectful of your
autonomy and your independence as a
human being but other times you don't
feel good around someone simply because
you are different people with different
value sets different priorities and
different needs and so it's more trouble
than it's worth to try to be extremely
close to that person but maybe you could
be a little bit close to them maybe you
could be a friend not a partner maybe
you could be an acquaintance not a close
friend i think that when it comes to
green flags for people we want to be
really close to we have to really tune
into and think about what makes me feel
comfortable around someone what makes me
feel like i don't have to think so hard
to connect with someone what happens in
my physical body that alerts me that
it's time to relax and get comfortable
around someone and be authentic with
them and those are the green flags we
need to be looking for right it's not
about reading lists on the internet of
what good and bad traits are in a
partner the lists have to be
personalized and the only way that we
can get there is by really paying
attention to what's happening inside of
our bodies and our minds when we're
around the people that we want to be
close to so the other day i was thinking
about a friendship and i was getting
this kind of restless and unsettled
feeling and i really sat with that for a
moment and was like what am i
attributing that to and i realized this
is someone who i can't necessarily rely
on to make plans i can't necessarily be
sure that they'll show up when they say
they're going to show up i can't
necessarily be sure that they're going
to make time for me in the same way that
i'm willing to make time for them and
that just gave me an aha moment of okay
this person should be an acquaintance to
me not a close friend because when
acquaintances don't make time for me i
don't take it personally when the mutual
effort and prioritization is not there
with acquaintances i'm like yeah that
makes sense because we're not best
friends right so now my job is to just
move that person into a different
category in my head that has different
expectations on our relationship to each
other and that's probably going to make
both of us a lot happier in the long run
because i'm not forcing expectations
onto this person's behavior that doesn't
feel natural to them and we both just
get to enjoy whatever interactions we do
have within the boundaries we're both
comfortable with so for me a green flag
feels like a warm calm relaxed situation
where i don't have to think before i
speak too much and i can feel reasonably
sure that i'll be accepted and that the
level of effort that i put forth will be
reciprocated by someone so if i don't
have to worry when i'm texting someone
or when i'm asking someone to hang out
that i'm only intermittently gonna hear
back or whatever it is right i don't
like that feeling so i'm just not gonna
have it anymore i'm gonna prioritize
relationships with people who can meet
me where i'm at and who when i think
about i get that calm grounded centered
feeling in my body and it's so much
simpler than i think we make it out to
be a lot of the time because a lot of
the time again we're being overly
cognitive about this we're thinking well
if someone didn't do anything wrong we
shouldn't punish them by changing the
nature of our relationship with them but
it's not a punishment to reevaluate the
way that we relate to people in a lot of
cases we can love and appreciate people
much more once we have appropriate
expectations of them so the process of
becoming aware of what those
expectations that we have are and then
being willing to work with them is going
to get us really far in the direction of
forming relationships that are actually
right for us all right as always i'm
very curious about how you guys are
processing all of this so take a moment
tune into your body when you're thinking
about your relationships with different
people and notice what sensations come
up i get this kind of restless and like
frantic energy when i'm thinking about
relationships with people that don't
feel stable or secure and i get this
kind of like clammed up and cold feeling
when i think about relationships with
people where i feel like i have to
inhibit myself or act differently than i
truly am in order to avoid conflict with
them and then when i think about my good
friends i just feel super grounded in my
body like my muscles relax like i can
feel my butt on my chair like my energy
is kind of calm and consistent so let me
know what it is that you notice about
what comes up in your body when you're
thinking about different relationships
and what that might be telling you about
what your own red and green flags are
i'm actually very very curious about
this one because these are all so
subjective so it's super interesting to
see what these are for different people
so let me know below and as always i
love you guys i hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and i will
see you back here again super soon
[Music]