hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about integrity and today in particular
I want to do a deep dive on the topic of
resentment now the experience of
resentment is something that we very
often have when we are out of Integrity
with ourselves so when we are not being
true to our own beliefs our own values
and when we are Outsourcing our autonomy
to someone else now this is often very
difficult to catch because at a first
glance a lot of people confuse the
experience of resentment for the
experience of anger but these are very
different things so when we feel angry
we are in our no energy so we are
setting boundaries we are rejecting what
we don't want in our lives and we are
getting clear about what it is that we
want to keep ourselves away from
resentment is a very different
experience when we are in a state of
resentment we are in a state of wanting
It generally feels like we are doing a
group project and we have done our half
of the work but our partner simply will
not hand in theirs the problem is that
because a lot of us internalize rules
about how we ought to behave and how
other people ought to behave as a result
of how we behave from a very young and
very unconscious place we often grow
into adulthood not really clear on what
our expectations of other people are and
so when those expectations are UNC
conscious and yet we are still
fulfilling what we feel on a very deep
unconscious level to be our half of the
bargain and then expecting someone else
to do something specific as a result if
they don't do that thing as a result we
end up sitting around with a whole bunch
of simmering resentment towards that
person we are waiting for them to do
what we think that they should do based
on what we are doing so what we're going
to talk about today is how to make those
unconscious contracts that we have for
how other people ought to behave in
response to how we behave conscious for
ourselves so without further Ado we'll
get into some of the different types of
resentment I believe that there's two
main categories of resentful feelings
one are feelings that arise when we are
doing too much suppressing of our
authentic selves so I call these
self-suppression
contracts somewhere along the line we
have decided that suppressing ourselves
is going to get us something specific
out of other people and then the other
type of contract is contracts of
overextension so these are areas where
we've decided I will always behave in
xway air go other people have to always
behave in a certain way as well and
we'll get into a whole bunch of examples
of what these look like but essentially
in the first category we're not showing
up with enough authenticity and in the
second category we're not showing up
with enough boundaries so let's look at
some examples of these things so
whenever I think of resentment and
self-suppression I think of a a
conversation that I had with someone
years and years ago where they were very
frustrated with their boss and felt kind
of chronically resentful and
preemptively annoyed every time they had
a meeting with this person who was meant
to manage them and I asked them some
questions about the scenario just kind
of trying to get at what were their job
requirements did they feel like they
were being held to unfair standards and
something really interesting surfaced
which was that the thing this manager
was asking of them was essentially just
to meet the basic demands of the job
and these were demands that this person
had explicitly agreed to meet when they
had been interviewed but for whatever
reason they felt chronic resentment
every day when they got up to go to
their job and what we eventually
surfaced the more we kept talking about
it was that this person felt as though
to go into their job in the morning they
had to completely and totally suppress
their true personality and put on a
totally fake personality that the role
required of them and this felt for them
like an extraordinary amount of effort
so much so that anything on top of that
including some of the basic requirements
of the job just felt totally
overwhelming for them to meet so they
were essentially spending so much energy
on repressing themselves that they had
almost nothing left over to give to the
job the problem is that their boss had
no idea this was happening because they
had walked into that interview and
contorted themselves into the exact type
of person they thought their boss wanted
them to be got hired to be that person
and then went into work every single day
as a false version of themselves and
then any criticism that they faced felt
like adding salt to the wound because
they felt like they were already doing
so much just to keep their real
personality hidden that it was
unreasonable for them to expect to do
anything more so something I asked this
person was when you were a child what
was it like in your family what happened
if you suppressed your personality and
acted like the person your parents
wanted to be and very quickly they went
oh then all of my needs got met as long
as I was pretending that I liked what my
parents liked and I was interested in
what my parents were interested in they
took care of everything for me and so
this is the unconscious contract that
this person
internalized if I suppress myself and
put on the face of whatever personality
I think is going to appeal to the people
in charge I will get all of my needs met
I don't have to do anything extra so
they walked into a job with this
attitude and then got confused when
their survival needs which as an adult
looks like Financial Security were not
automatically getting met by virtue of
the fact that they were suppressing
their true personality so this type of
contract that they had this contract of
I will suppress myself and then you owe
me security kind of follows the formula
of I will suppress myself in xway and in
return you will give me why on a deeply
unconscious level this was what they
believed to to be true about the world
so other versions of this contract might
look like if I suppress my true
personality and act like the type of
person I think you want to date you owe
me a commitment you owe me security but
this is not the only type of contract we
might have in the arena of
self-suppression so we'll look at a
different example I once had a friend
who was getting chronically frustrated
and resentful towards his girlfriend who
felt very comfortable when she was angry
expressing her anger and telling him
what she didn't like about the
relationship and he felt as though any
expression of anger on her behalf was
irrational and an
overreaction and I asked him what
happens in your relationship when you
get angry with your girlfriend and he
went well I don't get angry anger is
immature and so he was walking around
with this contract I will suppress my
anger in the name of acting mature and
other people have to also suppress their
anger so because I suppressing myself in
this way everybody else ought to do the
same so this is another type of
unconscious repression contract we might
have with ourselves if I repress myself
in xway everybody else ought also to
repress themselves in xway because that
is the right way to be so this person
felt like they were doing the right
thing in their relationship by keeping
their own anger inside and that their
girlfriend was doing the wrong thing by
expressing ing her anger and so a term
that came up a lot in conversations with
his friend was the term double standards
he kept claiming that his girlfriend had
double standards and I asked him did she
tell you that she's not okay with you
getting angry and he went well no and I
went okay have you tried getting angry
and has she told you that's not fine I
don't want you to do that and he goes
well no and so I asked where is the
double standard and when he really went
looking for it in his relationship he
could not find clear evidence that there
was a double standard because he had
never tried expressing his anger to see
what would happen but my bet is that
somewhere in that person's history there
was a double standard so maybe when they
were a child their parents felt
perfectly comfortable expressing anger
towards them but they weren't allowed to
express anger in return so they grew up
with this contract that I am not allowed
to express anger but other people for
some reason feel like they can and
that's not fair hence the resentment
towards other people for doing what they
believe they were not allowed to do in
their version of a fair world no one
would Express anger instead of realizing
that actually in a fair World they could
express themselves the same way
everybody else expressed themselves and
this type of contract is not limited to
anger right I actually used to get
really frustrated when I saw people
expressing themselves in a very emotive
way because I grew up in in a very
avoidant very German family environment
where expressing emotion was pretty much
always met with rejection of some sort
and I used to get really frustrated when
I saw people in the world who were
really free and emotive and expressive
and eventually I had to surface that I
had the unconscious contract if you show
too much emotion you get rejected I have
to suppress my emotion and everybody
else should suppress their emotion as
well so this is another one of those
self-suppression contracts I suppress X
so everybody should suppress X and if
they don't I'm going to feel resentful
towards them and when we surface a
self-suppression contract it opens up
space for us to start thinking about
what it could be like if we would allow
ourselves to break our own rules that we
internalized very young and start
showing up more authentically bringing
in more anger bringing in more of our
authentic personalities bringing in more
emotionality bringing in more
self-expression and this might require
us to change our environment sometimes
so if we have been hired for a workplace
role based on a false personality that
we presented to the interviewer we might
need to go find a different job that is
better suited to our personality if we
find that bringing our real self into
that first workplace just does not work
so well or if we have self- selected our
way into relationships where there are
true double standards in order to bring
more of our own energy into
relationships we might have to change
something about how we're picking
Partners but but the antidote to this
type of resentment is always more
self-expression so bringing in more of
ourselves so that we stop unconsciously
expecting other people to behave a
certain way based on the fact that we
are suppressing ourselves which by the
way they often cannot even tell that we
are doing so a lot of the time we have
all of this resentment pent up in our
minds towards other people who have no
idea whatsoever that we are not being
authentic with them in the first place
so this can be a really tricky and
Insidious one
but tackling it tends to take us a
really long way towards living in a more
authentic capacity now the second type
of contracts we want to take a look at
today are contracts of
overextension when we are overextending
ourselves what we are not doing is
setting enough clear boundaries so I
used to have a contract for myself that
went when someone I love is in trouble I
will always bail them out that's who I
am that's who I like to be but the
problem is that if I had loved ones who
I felt like were not taking enough care
of themselves and were not acting
proactively to prevent crises from
happening down the line I would get
super resentful when a crisis did arrive
and I automatically considered myself
responsible for going to them and
tending to the crisis but in reality it
was always my responsibility to set
boundaries about that so this type of
unconscious contract follows the formula
of I will always do X so you need to do
why I will always support you through
crisis so you need to take reasonable
precautions to make sure that you do not
end up in crisis or I will always take
your opinion of me to heart so you have
to have a positive opinion of me and
where the antidote to this comes in is
when we learn to use discernment so
instead of having that word always in
there once we make these contracts
conscious to ourselves we can start
replacing the word always with something
that is more conditional that makes more
sense and allows us to set clean
boundaries so I could have that first
rule become I will always show up to
help the people I'm close to if I
believe that they are also really trying
to help themselves this allows me to
support people rather than continue to
enable them if they are not interested
in taking
responsibility or I will take my family
members opinions of me to heart if I
believe that they have taken the time to
actually deeply get to know me and are
not just projecting what they want onto
me so I will use my discernment to try
to figure out where someone's judgments
are coming from before I immediately
adopt them so the always in the original
statement changes to an if and on the
flip side of that if is a lot of
boundaries that we might need to set
whether those are practical in nature I
will not give you money to bail yourself
out of a situation that you could have
prevented or emotional in nature I won't
take on this opinion of me if I don't
believe that the person presenting it to
me was operating in good faith and then
the other type of overextension
boundaries look like I always do X so
you always have to do X I am always
reliable and on time so other people
have to always be reliable in on time I
am always emotionally present and
supportive of the people in my life so
the people in my life have to always be
present and emotionally supportive
towards me if not I will continue to be
emotionally present and supportive and I
will will start harboring resentment
towards them for not doing the same so
once again what we want to change here
is that if not statement so I will be
emotionally supportive towards the
people in my life if they are
emotionally supportive towards me if not
I will be as emotionally supportive as
feels good for me but I will draw
boundaries around the relationship if I
find myself growing resentful that they
are not doing the same for me so this is
about exercising choice and autonomy in
the types of relationships we form I
really enjoy being reliable and
dependable I need to be out there
actively looking for other people who
also genuinely and authentically like
being reliable and dependable otherwise
I'm trying to shove the whole world into
this contract that not everybody is
going to fall into so in my own life I
have friends who I know if I make a plan
with this person there is a 95% chance
that plan is going to happen barring
some form of emergency or illness and
then there's friends where I know that
if I make a plan with them there's maybe
a 50% chance it's going to happen or
that it's going to happen at the time we
agreed on and so with those friends I'm
just not going to hold those plans as
tightly I'm going to make a backup plan
for when we agree to hang out so this is
about taking the word always out of
these statements about how we will
behave and instead adjusting for the
context of the situation or the
relationship that we are in but we're
going to talk more about that soon so
the next part of this video is going to
be talking about how to surface these
unconscious contracts for ourselves
and then what to do with them once we
figure out what they are so to surface
our contracts what we want to do is
first just pause anytime we find
ourselves feeling resentful and get
really curious about what's going on so
let's say I text someone and they don't
text me back for several hours but I see
that they've been online what I want to
do is stop and just write down in a
journal or in the notes app on my phone
what I think this person should do and
this is the time to not hold back you
are allowed to be irrational in fact it
actually works best if you give your
irrationality airspace now what this
does not mean is that we are believing
our own stories about our way being the
best of all possible ways we just want
to get clear on what it is that we're
unconsciously believing so that we can
make it conscious so I'm going to want
to sit down and go this person should
always text me back in a timely manner
or this person should always respond to
my text if they are online
and then once we've really gotten out
what it is that we think the other
person should do we want to do the
second half of this statement so the
first half is they should dot dot dot
the second half is because I dot dot dot
so this is about figuring out why we
feel justified in expecting this
behavior from someone else so something
like because I always respond to their
texts right away and then we want to
look at what type of a statement we're
making so they should respond to my
texts right away because I always
respond to theirs right away is in that
last category I always do X so they
should always do X and now we know what
type of contract we're working with as
well as what type of antidote we need to
be looking for and that's an easy
example but we can find some absolutely
Bonkers contracts inside of our
unconscious minds I have found some
truly bizarre ones but that's actually a
really good thing because the really
bizarre unconscious contracts that we're
holding on to are often the things that
are messing up our lives the most so you
might surface a contract that says
something like I will suppress my entire
personality in order to be in a romantic
relationship with you and then you must
win me the love of my family by Charming
them at every event that I take you to
that involves my family because
unconsciously the reason why we might be
dating someone who we're suppressing our
entire personality to be around is
because we want something out of them
that we don't consciously understand we
want and as soon as we make it conscious
it starts sounding Bonkers you should be
winning me the love and approval of my
family because I am suppressing myself
to be with you is not a contract that it
would make sense to ask anybody to agree
to but this is why we need to make these
unconscious things conscious for
ourselves and we have to allow ourselves
to be extremely brutally honest with
ourselves about what it is that we're
feeling resentment towards so some more
examples of what a you should because I
statement might look like are they
should never complain about their work
even if they're unhappy with their job
because I never complain about my work
even though I'm unhappy with my job they
should load the dishwasher as soon as
they're done eating because I will
always clean the kitchen if it's a mess
they should propose to me because I am
pretending to love all of the things
that they love they should make x amount
of money because I make x amount of
money and here's what's interesting
about all of this what I am not implying
is that any of these are necessarily
things that you have to drop but when
we're walking around with something as
an unconscious contract it feels like we
are right and the other person is wrong
if they are not fulfilling their part of
it but once we surface these things and
make them conscious for ourselves we can
convert them into
preferences so all of these statements
start sounding different if we voice
them as preferences I like making a
certain amount of money and I have a
preference for dating someone who makes
a a similar amount of money I have a
preference for keeping the kitchen clean
so I want to find roommates or people to
live with who also want to keep things
clean I have a preference for being
reliable and on time so I'm going to
prioritize friendships with people who
also try to be reliable in on time I
want my future spouse and I to do a lot
of the same activities together so I'm
going to prioritize trying to find
someone to date who authentically likes
the same things that I like all of these
are not not only perfectly reasonable
but they put the power back in our hands
because instead of deciding that
everyone has to act the way we have
decided is the right way to act we can
go out actively searching for people to
bring into our Lives who just naturally
share our preferences and wants and this
is exactly how secure people operate
it's not that they get along with
everyone else who's secure it's that
they have their desires and preferences
consciously available to them so they go
out into the world and in most cases
they're explicit and honest about what
it is they're looking for what matters
to them what's important to them and
then if someone else does not share
those preferences they don't decide the
other person is bad or evil or has to
change they just adjust their own
boundaries accordingly so someone who
they have really different values from
they can acknowledge just might not be
the best person for them to live with or
be really close with or form a long-term
relationship with and this is why it's
very rare to find a secure person who's
carrying around a ton of resentment
because all of these contracts that are
unconscious for those of us who are
insecure are conscious and right on the
surface for them so they're able to act
with autonomy around their wants and
needs so step two of this process once
we surface with those unconscious
contracts are is we start making them
explicit for other people so the two
questions we ask ourselves at this step
are one can I make this contract overt
and give someone the option to say yes
or no to it and two if I do that and
they say no how could I adjust my own
boundaries so that I'm no longer feeling
resentful in this relationship so what
would allow me to accept this person
exactly as they are without growing
resentful towards them does that mean
that I just need to readjust how I am
showing up in the relationship so I
don't feel like I'm getting taken
advantage of maybe if I feel like I'm
constantly doing things for this person
and they're not reciprocating I should
be doing less for them and putting that
energy somewhere else into relationships
where there is more reciprocity and I
also want to note here that you might be
surfacing some of those really weird
contracts that it would feel bizarre to
bring in right but it can actually be a
really good exercise to bring them in
anyways with the caveat that this is
some strange unconscious thing you've
been carrying around that you've now
made yourself aware of now this Dynamic
that was always underlying your
relationship is consciously available to
both of you and so you can talk about
the problems in your relationship at the
level that they actually exist at and so
this is what we can do to work with this
in the short term but in the long term
what we want to make sure we're doing is
figuring out how we can design our lives
around contracts that give us more
autonomy so this might mean realizing
the ways in which we've been suppressing
ourselves because we think it's the only
way to be in connection with people and
finding new environments or new people
to be around where we don't have to do
that where who we authentically are and
the way that we actually want to show up
is what they genuinely like or it might
mean getting much better at boundary
setting and at figuring out when it's
appropriate for us to do these actions
that we like to do like showing up for
the people in our lives or being open
and emotionally honest versus when it's
time to protect ourselves in that area
and how can we find more people who just
enjoy showing up in the same way that we
do so a great place to start is just
surfacing as many of these contracts as
we can
figuring out which category they fall
into and then figuring out how we could
behave more autonomously by either doing
more self-expression and or more setting
boundaries all right I'm going to leave
it at that for today but as always any
questions or thoughts that you've had as
you've gone through this video please
leave them in the comment section below
I love you guys I hope you're taking
care of yourselves and each other and I
will see you back here again really soon
oh