All of us have the best and healthiest
relationship to giving when we are
receiving in approximately equal
measure. And so when we go out looking
for maturity in ourselves or other
people, we don't just want to look at
how good am I at standing on my own in
life or how good is someone else at
making it through life without any
support. We want to look at how good am
I at recognizing where my weaknesses lie
and how I can design my environment in a
way where I am able to consistently get
the support I need in order to be my
best most charitable self without
burning out or having to chronically
avoid my own feelings. This is what true
maturity in the realm of independence
looks like. It looks a lot more like
interdependence than it does
counterdependence.