hey guys welcome back to my channel
heidi preeb here today i wore my funnest
top that i could find for the least fun
topic that i think i've tackled yet
which is enfps and breakups this is one
that i have gotten requested quite a few
times and i also know that when i wrote
the enfp survival guide there's a
section on relationships that included
breakups and a lot of people found that
helpful so i figured it was worth making
a video about i have gone through some
just terrible breakups in my life where
i did not have the proper coping tools
the proper level of self-awareness to
navigate them with empathy for both
myself and the other person and it got
messy a lot of the time and i really
empathize with any enfp who is going
through that or any person who is going
through that because relationships are
very difficult and very emotional things
and having a relationship end is
honestly one of the hardest things that
i think human beings have to go through
it is i won't get started on the rant
too early but it is so unnatural like
breakups are just this completely
unnatural concept we invented where it's
like pick one person okay and bond the
hardest with them out of anyone in the
entire world and then suddenly cut it
off and never talk to them again and
then you're supposed to like hate them
and have negative feelings towards them
according to like the media and it's
just complete and utter like
breakups are so that's where
i'm starting from in this video is that
i think the way we structure breakups is
absurd okay and that there are not many
healthy models out there for dealing
with them and for dealing with the very
real very visceral emotions that come up
through the process of a breakup and so
i want to encourage everyone to listen
to your gut a little bit more a lot
actually when you're going through a
breakup or the ending of any other
meaningful relationship in your life
because it does not help us to just
downplay these emotions that we have
downplay the bond that we have with
someone else and tell ourselves that now
it's supposed to mean nothing of course
it doesn't mean nothing right there's so
much that you have probably taken and
learned and grown through in that
relationship good or bad even if the
relationship was a terrible one there
are probably a lot of lessons you can
take out of it and a lot of what i'm
going to talk about in this video is
just learning to slow the process down
instead of thinking that you have to do
what everyone is telling you to do
immediately after a breakup figure out
your own pace your own process what
works for you because that's going to be
what helps you actually gain the
emotional coping skills to move forward
in a more meaningful way this is
probably a very tender and very raw part
of your life that you're going through
if you're going through a breakup so
honor that and be present with that and
allow yourself to feel whatever you need
to feel so that later you don't have to
feel it in a completely messed up way in
let's say your next relationship but we
are getting ahead of ourselves so i
decided to structure this video i don't
know why this is just what my brain told
me to do when i was sitting down to
write it uh through a series of do's and
don'ts and again use your own inner
wisdom and your own inner guidance here
but i wanted to lay down some kind of
common traps that i feel like enfps can
get stuck in after relationships end and
just talk about how to navigate those
traps in a more healthy way disclaimer
time so a lot of how we deal with
relationships and particularly a lot of
how we deal with relationships ending is
actually in my opinion a lot more
related to attachment style than to
personality typology in the myers-briggs
system so i think that enfps will have
some similarities some common traps that
they fall into that let's say an istj
might not struggle with quite as much
but i think that you really have to
factor in things like your attachment
style things like your past experiences
things like i don't know even your
enneagram type or your past traumas or
just anything that is in your psyche
influencing the way that you think about
yourself as a social and emotional
creature those things are going to come
out screaming as soon as you are in a
little tiny bit of a raw vulnerable
emotional place and breakups tend to be
a very large raw and vulnerable and
emotional space so keep in mind that
myers-briggs is very far from the only
system that is going to influence the
way that you approach breakups and move
through them but because it's the system
that we talk the most about on here
besides attachment style and i will
absolutely in the future do a series on
breakups and attachment styles it's just
gonna be a lot longer
um we will for today keep things in the
realm of myers-briggs and talk about
some of the things that enfps might do
while they're going through a breakup
and which things we should probably be
aware of just have like some yield signs
in our brains around to make sure that
we don't end up in a worse spot than we
need to end up in when we're already
navigating a really difficult period of
our lives so without further ado
pun not intended i'm not a very big pun
person despite the fact that people
often attribute liking puns to any i
don't think it's true i think nis users
are the ones who like puns because it's
like a double meaning which is their
whole thing you know like playing on
words and being clever and
more clever
in like a more overt way
anyway
without further ado let's talk about the
do's and don'ts of breaking up as an
enfp number one don't and i've already
touched on this a little bit because i
could not contain myself but don't feel
like you have to adhere to every social
norm that is set out for breakups okay
there are so many kind of fe style norms
out there about a the way you're
supposed to feel after a breakup and b
the way that you're supposed to handle
those feelings and if you so happen to
feel the exact way that everyone tells
you you're supposed to feel after a
breakup cool whatever run with that
kudos but
if it so happens that your feelings are
very fluid very convoluted very
confusing
i want to take a second and assure you
that that is completely freaking
normal okay it is very normal when you
have had a humongously significant
relationship with someone to not feel
totally chill about like never talking
to them again right away right that is
quite literally a deep attachment wound
that i think it is bizarre we expect
people to just cleanly move on from like
this idea that we're supposed to take a
week or so and cry and be upset and
maybe be angry at our partner and then
move on and never feel anything about it
ever again is insane if anyone figures
out a strategy for actually doing that
please just come on my channel and tell
everyone else how it's done because i
have never figured it out personally
every time i have gone through a breakup
in my life i have absolutely continued
to love that person for a long time
after we broke up and we will get into
this there has to be healthy boundaries
around expressing those feelings because
a breakup has happened but telling
yourself you shouldn't be feeling
something that is very raw and present
and intense for you is not the way to
stop feeling it it's just the way to
create a whole bunch of internal
judgment internal tension internal
struggle and it keeps you from doing the
actual work of processing the grief
around the fact that you still feel a
lot of different ways towards someone
who maybe isn't a part of your life
anymore but the worst possible thing you
can do with all of those emotions is
tell yourself that you shouldn't be
feeling them that you have to stop
feeling them that there should be a time
limit on what you feel and for how long
and again this doesn't mean that you
don't work with those emotions that you
don't maybe seek out the help of a
therapist or a friend or someone who can
help you work through them if you're
really feeling stuck on them but i
really have seen this tendency in enfps
to kind of downplay their emotions
almost like gaslight themselves a little
bit about how strongly they felt and how
strongly they might still feel when
they're going through a breakup because
they think that there is a sense of
shame that should be associated with
still feeling something for someone
who's not in their life anymore and
maybe that person isn't in your life
anymore for a valid reason the first
serious relationship i ever had to end
i'd end cause some genuinely shady
was going down and for a long time i
thought that meant that the only emotion
it was acceptable for me to feel was
anger but i didn't just feel anger i
felt intense
pain and grief over the person that i
thought that person was right i felt
intense rejection i felt intense moments
of just wanting to call that person and
bring them back into my life and just
have selective memory for the rest of my
life and if i had not allowed myself to
move through every single one of those
difficult and longing emotions in a real
way it would have kept me stuck on them
forever because that's what happens when
we don't move through our true feelings
and we try to deny them right they stay
present for us and they come out in
weird neurotic ways so don't number one
is don't feel like you have to have your
emotions happening on a specific
timeline that maybe works for other
people right recognize whatever is
coming up for you when it's coming up
for you allow it into your psyche allow
yourself permission to feel it even if
it's not what you think you should be
feeling and give it the honor that it
truly deserves give the relationship you
had the honor that it truly deserves
right just because someone stops being
right for us just because a relationship
stops fitting in our lives doesn't mean
that having had it was not an incredible
thing right something that we can be
extraordinarily grateful for
so don't feel like you have to
downplay and dismiss your own
relationships or your own feelings about
them ending they mattered and it hurts
so much because it was so significant in
your life right so you owe it to
yourself to give yourself the time and
space to process that in whatever way it
feels right for you to process it now
the counterpoint to this
do be respectful of the other person's
grieving process so i have seen a lot of
cases and i have been the perpetrator in
a lot of cases of enfps leaving a
relationship and then just waffling like
crazy and being like no wait maybe i
want back in no way maybe i want out and
this can also be related to like fearful
avoidant attachment it can be related to
a lot of different things but
allowing yourself to feel whatever
you're feeling
does not mean giving yourself permission
to act in any way that you feel inclined
on the whim of a moment to act okay so
feeling grief over your relationship
ending does not mean going back to the
person you just broke up with and being
like just kidding i changed my mind and
then changing your mind again two days
later when all of a sudden you feel
resentment right we do not have to act
on every feeling that we feel we just
have to give ourselves permission to
feel them with healthy boundaries around
our acting so don't bring the other
person or other people involved into
your emotional experience in an
unhealthy way that's going to change
their emotional experience for the worse
right we have to find ways to process
our emotions without putting those
emotions on other people particularly
the people that we just broke up with
okay so honor the moving on process of
the other person and often if this
person is an fe user they might have a
slightly more linear a slightly more
traditional moving on process than you
have and that might really hurt
right it hurts to see our ex
partners move on before we do or before
we're ready to but we have to allow
other people the grace to heal on their
own timeline and we have to give
ourselves the grace to heal on our own
right live and let live is what fi
naturally does pretty well when we give
ourselves permission to the second don't
that i would recommend watching out for
if you are an enfp is don't move on
without understanding what went wrong in
the first place it can be so tempting
particularly if you're insecurely
attached to jump out of a relationship
and immediately find something else to
occupy all of your mental space so
whether that is another relationship
whether that is career whether that is
just throwing yourself into a cause or
project yes that can be healthy there
can be a certain level of healthy
distraction that allows you to move
through your emotions with some positive
feelings thrown into the mix but if we
are trying to simply barrel forward
without processing what went wrong and
what was unhealthy about our past
relationships and what would be an
obstacle in the future if we were to
re-enter a different relationship it's
like we are throwing away the
opportunity to learn this humongous
lesson and to take so much out of the
experience that we shared with someone
else and to internalize it and to grow
wiser and stronger and more resilient
through the experience when we avoid our
inner world at times like this it's like
showing up to a university class and
putting our headphones in right there is
so much information that is available to
you at times like this and if we are
electing to tune it out and to not look
at it or pay attention to it we are
literally just stunting our growth as
human beings okay
it hurts to look at what went wrong it
hurts to look at what we could have done
better it hurts to sit with the grief
and the pain of having lost something
but
that pain that grief that hurt can be
our greatest teacher it can bring us to
some of the most extraordinary lessons
that we will ever learn in our lives if
we just refuse to give ourselves
permission to immediately jump into the
next thing that feels tempting or looks
exciting right there will always be
exciting things to engage with in the
world there will always be new
opportunities new people new things that
come along that light us up in life but
after a really painful experience has
happened is not necessarily the time to
completely throw yourself into something
new right don't move on without learning
the lessons that you needed to learn
from the experience you went through you
are missing out on one of the most
meaningful parts of your life if you do
that now that being said the
counterpoint to this is do stay open to
what's coming in the future so i find
that a lot of enfps tend to be kind of
polarized in these areas so one enfp
will like immediately throw themselves
into the next project the next
relationship the next whatever and then
the one next to them will stay real
stuck when they go through a breakup or
the end of a relationship and they will
ruminate endlessly on their pain and
what went wrong and it's important to
note that that is not healthy lesson
learning right if we're just ruminating
and turning things over in our heads and
not really learning anything meaningful
that's the point where maybe we need to
see a counselor we need to work with
someone who can help us extract the
lessons from what we've gone through so
don't ruminate over the past at the
expense of staying open and fluid and
responsive to your present do allow
yourself some joy do allow yourself to
form new relationships with people do
allow your life to move forward just
don't do it at the expense of learning
the lessons that you need to learn right
life is always and will always be this
fine balance of holding on and letting
go and learning when to do each is going
to be one of the most important lessons
that any of us learn don't number three
and this relates a little bit to those
who might be more prone towards
rumination is don't assume that no one
else could possibly understand what
you're going through okay i have been so
guilty of this one at every point in my
life every time i've ever gone through a
breakup in my life i have felt like a
deep sense of shame that i feel anything
at all about the relationship that might
be like an enneagram or a trauma thing i
don't know but i also have this very
deep sense of no one could possibly
understand what i'm feeling no one has
ever felt the way that i feel no one
could possibly understand my unique
situation and the unique relationship
that i have with this other person so
i'm just going to not bother trying to
explain to other people what i'm feeling
not bother letting people in on what i'm
going through not bother being honest
about what i'm actually feeling and
instead i would just kind of say the
things that i thought you were supposed
to say after a breakup and act like i
was already over it and already moved on
and already happy and onto something
else but in reality it was never that
clean cut i have never in my life had a
breakup where i just felt fine after
that's not how people work that's not
how attachment works when we lose
something that matters to us it hurts
and it sucks and it's hard to go through
and no nobody is going to understand
exactly 100
every nuance of how you feel but you
have to give them a chance you have to
show up and try to share yourself with
the people in your life try to
explain honestly where you're at and
what you're going through even if it
doesn't fit the traditional norm of what
you're supposed to be feeling after a
breakup other people often understand a
lot more than you think they do other
people might even be relieved to kind of
hear what you're going through because
they've been through it too they've felt
a lot of the emotions that you think
only you are feeling or have ever felt
they just also thought they couldn't
share that or couldn't say it out loud
being the person who is willing to go
first with emotional honesty
opens up the door for these incredibly
fulfilling and honest relationships that
we could have in our lives but someone
has to be willing to be honest first
okay and if you can allow that to be you
especially at a point where you're going
through something really difficult that
feels very specific and unique in its
pain those are the moments that can
bring you closer to other people than
anything else so don't think that no one
else could possibly understand what
you're going through give people some
credit give people some credit in their
willingness to try if they don't
understand what you're going through and
to want to listen and be there and
understand as best they can now that
being said do recognize that the
relationship you had with this other
person who you've broken up with was
completely unique no two people anywhere
else in the world will ever have that
exact relationship again and that is
what makes human relationships of any
sort whether they're romantic platonic
family relationships so special it is
always this divine meeting of two people
who have completely unique things to
share with each other and god that's
cool it's really cool that you got to
share that with someone i remember the
last time i left a really serious
relationship i was listening to all too
well by taylor swift like years later
like a long time later because i really
delayed processing that one and there's
this line at the end where she goes it
was rare i was there i remember it
and i just remember picking up on the
word rare and thinking that is such a
wonderful term to apply to a past
relationship because especially if you
are insecurely attached and especially
especially if you are on the anxious
spectrum so either anxious or fearful
avoidantly attached there is this
inherent world view that tells you that
love is very scarce so if you leave a
relationship you're never going to find
someone who loves you like that ever
again if you find one person who wants
to be with you you have to like hold on
to them for dear life and that sense of
scarcity keeps a lot of people trapped
in relationships that aren't working
that sense of scarcity makes us panic
when relationships end because we think
oh my god i'm never going to find
something like this ever again but i
think the healthy flip side of the word
scarce is the word rare rare implies
that yeah this was special this specific
thing is never gonna happen again it's
rare but that's different than scarce
the experience of love will happen again
for you absolutely if you want it to it
absolutely will
but what you had with another person is
always rare because the agreement to
come together and share yourself deeply
with another human being in a loving
romantic relationship is a rare
experience we don't go through that so
many times in our lives in a very real
and vulnerable and raw way and it's okay
to really honor the fact that yeah this
isn't an everyday thing it requires an
emotional burial service in your own
mind you know it merits you spending
some time appreciating it and that can
be a really really healthy thing to do
even if it didn't end so well very like
thank you next vibes you know but take
the next and like push it a little bit
down the road because the whole moving
on right away thing we already covered
all right next one so the do and don't
that i just gave was directed a little
bit more towards anxiously attached
spectrum types avoidantly attached
spectrum types might struggle more with
this one which is don't detach from your
feelings by projecting them okay and
what i mean by that is
often when we have trouble accessing our
own emotions we can only really access
them by seeing them in other people so
let's say you go through a breakup you
kind of feel like weird in that you
don't feel a lot at all you feel fine
about it maybe you feel relieved that
the pressure's off but maybe you
suddenly feel these very intense
feelings about other people going
through tough situations or you might
feel very guilty or very much like oh i
bet the person i just broke up with is
suffering a lot and i feel a lot of pain
about that
and recognize that for what it is which
is a projection that you are feeling
something very strongly but you're
having trouble feeling it for yourself
so you have to feel it for someone else
or towards someone else and this could
be towards your ex partner towards a
friend you know who's going through a
breakup towards a movie character who's
going through something difficult i
actually don't know for sure that this
is more of an avoidance thing it might
just be a person thing but if you're
feeling strong emotions come up
elsewhere in inappropriate situations
don't let that go okay don't just kind
of go that's weird and shrug it off
recognize that as your own emotional
experience coming up in what feels like
a safer way for your brain so i remember
one time like way in the past i was
cheated on and i didn't feel i mean i
definitely felt some negative stuff
about it mostly anger but i never felt
like sad about it and then i had a
friend like years later who was cheated
on and i felt
the most overwhelming sadness for this
friend and it was not even a close
friend like i didn't even like send them
a facebook message like that was how not
close of a friendship it was but i just
felt this like extreme crushing sense of
pain for them and i realized like
this is the pain i could never feel for
myself because i had so many judgments
about myself so many feelings of like oh
maybe i deserved this to happen because
i was all deep in my own attachment
wounding right
and i was able to feel it for this other
person because i believed that they were
not deserving of something bad happening
to them and it took me a long time to
recognize what that pain was was a
projection of my own emotion onto
someone who it felt safer to process it
through so the do and the don't are kind
of tied up here the don't is don't
project all of your emotions and tell
yourself you feel nothing spend some
time with yourself and get to know your
own emotions but the do is notice when
you are projecting if you feel an
inappropriately strong emotion in any
situation it's almost always a
projection of something deeper right and
this is a very common experience if you
go through something like a breakup
which is traumatic to your attachment
system one of your defense mechanisms
might be detaching from that emotion
might be avoiding your inner world while
the worst of it is going on right and if
that's the case you might start to
notice inappropriate emotions cropping
up in other scenarios because those
emotions have to get out somehow right
they're going to look for other roots
out so just be aware of that note when
you're feeling an emotion that doesn't
seem like it's quite right for that
situation or doesn't seem quite fitting
to that situation and take that as a cue
from your own mind that it wants to
process it's feeling more ready to move
through that emotional experience now
and that's a good thing and again you
need to create a space for yourself
where you are physically and emotionally
safe enough to move through those
difficult emotions and step one is just
recognizing them for what they are when
they come up even through seemingly
ridiculous experiences okay last don't
and this is one that anyone who's ever
been in the grip of their inferior si
after a breakup or who has been in an
fisi loop will understand a little bit
more but generally enfps and infps both
tend to fall into this trap quite often
after a difficult experience and it is
don't idealize the past so when the
future does not work out for us as nfps
sometimes it does sometimes it doesn't
you're always rolling the dice that's
how life is but i think a lot of the
time nfps leaving relationships enfps in
particular will get this feeling of like
i'm going to make the future so amazing
i'm going to do all of this stuff that i
couldn't do in my relationship and then
if that does not work out if that future
plan does not pan out the exact way you
thought it would there is a very intense
temptation to return to the past and
idealize the relationship that you once
had kind of gloss over everything that
went wrong and convince yourself that if
you can just get that relationship back
get it back to the place that it was
once in maybe like three years ago when
you were in a honeymoon phase or
something ridiculous like that then
everything will be okay forever
and here's the thing
there is nothing wrong with recognizing
that a lot of things were great about
relationships that we've had right we
should be taking lessons out of them we
should be reflecting on the past and
realizing what we've learned and how
we've grown alongside another person
that is so important and so healthy but
if we are ignoring everything that went
wrong and idealizing the past what we're
actually doing in that situation is
refusing to let ourselves grieve
idealization is a really really great
grief avoidance tactic right if we're
denying the actual pain that we had to
go through because a situation
necessitated us moving through that pain
because the alternative was more
chronically painful right leaving a
relationship hurts staying in a bad
relationship hurts chronically if we
don't give credit to and grieve that
chronic sense of pain that we were
experiencing we're going to want to just
go right back into it and a lot of us do
for most of my early life i was the
biggest perpetrator of on and off again
relationship so get out idealize the
past go back remember everything that
was wrong get back out idealize the past
it is a terrible cycle it is just
emotional purgatory for both people
involved so do
give yourself the gift here of grieving
the past of recognizing there was some
awesome stuff in that relationship and
any relationship probably has some good
stuff to look back on right even if it
didn't end well there was a reason you
stepped into that relationship in the
first place there was a reason you
wanted to be there for whatever length
of time you were there and you're gonna
have to acknowledge that feel it feel
the pain of wanting to go back to it it
will happen at some point and also
recognize there's a reason why i can't
there is a reason why i left there's a
reason why that wasn't working out and i
can't stay stuck in these idealizations
of it at the expense of my own future
growth right one foot on the gas one
foot on the break until we learn to look
at the past realistically and
acknowledge relationships for what they
were both good and bad and not try to
shove them solely into one category or
the other we're going to stay stuck in
this indecisive emotionally ambiguous
cycle the antidote to emotional
ambiguity is emotional self-awareness
understanding and giving credit to
everything that we felt while also
understanding what we need going forward
that is different
and that is at the end of the day the
only thing that ever truly brings us
closure when something really meaningful
has ended is understanding the why and
the what next and accepting that it's
gonna be hard something being for the
best in the long run doesn't make it
easy to move through in the short run
and so all of these do's and don'ts all
of these traps that we might fall into
really come down to the same thing which
is just acceptance
acceptance that something at one point
was right for us and maybe now it's not
anymore accepting that we're gonna feel
a lot of different things some of which
might really confuse us as we're moving
through them and that we have to have
patience for ourselves in that process
accepting that breakups are really
difficult and bizarre part of being
alive and that we need a lot of patience
with ourselves as we navigate them and
that is the number one
do i have throughout this entire process
is just do be patient with yourself do
accept wherever you're at at every point
in this process and do allow yourself to
move through it with an authentic
awareness of what it means for you
without worrying what it looks like to
anyone else what anyone else thinks you
should be feeling or doing okay this is
your life these are your emotions give
yourself the gift of moving through them
in a very real way you will thank
yourself immensely down the line okay i
think that is all for today i
procrastinated this video like it's been
requested a lot of times but no one
likes thinking about breakups it's not a
fun thing to go through so my heart
humongously humongously goes out to you
if this is something that you're going
through right now i hope you are being
super gentle and super understanding
with yourself as you go through it i
love you all so much hope you are loving
on yourselves as well and i will see you
back here sometime soon
[Music]