hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel we
are talking about projecting so we are
doing Shadow week on this channel which
is all about getting in touch with the
parts of ourselves that we have
repressed from our conscious awareness
and when we repress something from our
conscious awareness we usually encounter
it in other ways so rather than thinking
about ourselves in a certain light we
might start obsessively thinking that
somebody else is thinking of us that way
and that's kind of the working
definition of a projection that we're
going to be using today now we project
things all the time onto other people
this is just part of Being Human but
today what I want to work specifically
with is the experience of projecting our
insecurities onto other people
insecurities kind of represent the gap
between where we are in life and where
we would like to be or in other language
the gap between who we are and the kind
of idealized version of ourselves that
we might have inside our own heads and
sometimes it can be really difficult for
us to reckon with what's inside of that
Gap so the ways in which we're
disappointing ourselves or letting
ourselves down or not living up to what
we believe to be our true potential and
when we find that stuff really difficult
to accept or to face what we often do is
surround ourselves with people who we
believe are making those negative
judgments about us and then start to
grow resentful of them for the judgments
that we have decided they're making
about us now I also want to be clear
that a projection ceases to be a
projection if someone has given us very
objective explicit and direct feedback
on that thing and now that's why we
believe that they're thinking what
they're thinking so if someone comes up
to me and says hey I think you're ugly
and stupid I'm not projecting onto them
if I think that they think I'm ugly and
stupid but if I decide this person
thinks I'm ugly and stupid despite them
not ever saying that to me then what I'm
doing is projecting So today we're going
to be talking about how to recognize
when you're projecting as well as how to
break our projections down to really
understand what's going on with them so
we'll just start out with a quick
rundown of signs that you might be
projecting on to somebody so pretty much
anytime you have a very strong strong
belief that someone thinks a certain
thing about you or holds a certain
judgment about you that they have not
explicitly stated to you there's
projection going on another sign you
might notice that's a bit more subtle in
your own behavior that might indicate
you're projecting onto somebody is you
notice yourself starting to hide or
obscure certain parts of yourself when
you're around someone because you're
afraid that if they see certain parts of
you they're going to judge those parts
so you might start becoming really
avoidant or defensive around certain
topics when they come up even if the
other person is not expressing explicit
judgment towards you around those topics
and a third sign that we're likely doing
some projecting is anytime we start
noticing ourselves feeling highly
resentful towards someone based on
something we are imagining them to be
thinking about us which is once again
different from having resentment around
something someone actually said to us
it's definitely production if we're
angry at them for a thought that we
assume them to be having without us
having confirmed that they actually have
that thought so when we break down
projections there is one kind of
immediate impulse that I think comes up
for pretty much everybody which is am I
projecting or am I right right it can be
hard to know am I accurately picking up
on what I think someone is judging me
for or am I projecting my own beliefs
outward onto that person when really
they don't have that judgment about me
at all and if we're being really honest
with ourselves I think that the truth is
usually somewhere in the middle so
there's kind of a Venn diagram between
what we think someone is thinking of us
and what they're actually thinking of us
and the better we know someone the more
likely those diagrams are to overlap
neatly but the less we know someone the
more we're probably getting wrong but
there's a third factor that I think is
really important to take into account
which is what I want to spend the rest
of this video honing in on which is that
often what we're projecting on to people
is not an objective piece of information
it's the meaning that we think they are
making out of the information and that
meaning that we believe someone is
making out of a piece of information is
always coming directly from us so to
illustrate what I mean by that I will
give you a couple of examples let's say
you have some physical feature that you
have decided is unattractive and maybe
you have found a way to justify this by
going online and reading all of the
studies about what human beings find
attractive and you've decided nope I am
right this physical feature is
unattractive and everybody's going to
think so now I believe that's probably
not true I don't think there are any
physical features that every single
member of the human race would find
unattractive but let's say that were
true let's say you were actually right
and you do have a certain physical
feature that every single person who
ever met you is going to find
unattractive the thing you're projecting
might not be the feeling of I'm ugly it
might be all of the meaning that you
make around that statement so you might
decide I'm ugly air go I will never find
love I'm ugly Ergo everybody is pitying
me I'm ugly air go everybody is
disgusted by me when in reality even if
you were right about the fact that you
are the one person on Earth who is ugly
to everybody you would not be right
about the meaning that other people are
making out of that characteristic there
are a lot of people who kind of like
people who look a little rough around
the edges they might find a
conventionally less attractive
appearance to be the thing that makes
someone interesting maybe you're sitting
across from someone on a first date who
thinks the fact that you look a little
rough around the edges is a great
signifier that you're not particularly
Vain and maybe vanity is the number one
thing they don't want in a partner
people can make all sorts of different
meanings out of the same thing so what
we want to look at here is the meaning
that we're making out of what we're
projecting and a quick kind of
journaling exercise that can help you
get to the root of this is just writing
down the thing that you believe to be
objectively true so that can be
something like I am under qualified
applied for the job that I'm applying to
or I'm in x amount of debt or I have X
physical characteristic that I think is
unattractive and then complete the
sentence with and that means dot dot dot
and then write as many things as you can
immediately think of that come up when
you try to make meaning out of what that
thing you're insecure about is so maybe
I'm applying for a job and I am truly
underqualified I literally do not meet
the qualifications for the job and
somebody else who I know is applying is
overqualified for the position or
perfectly qualified for it I might make
that mean that I'm not going to get the
job when in reality I don't know exactly
what this company's decision making
criteria is when it comes to hiring so I
might sit down and write I am under
qualified and that means dot dot dot I'm
not going to get the job I'm not going
to get any job I shouldn't even bother
applying if they offer me an interview I
shouldn't go I'm not just noticing the
objective criteria of my qualifications
I'm making a ton of meaning around it
and that meaning is likely what I'm
going to be projecting onto the person
interviewing me if let's say I get an
interview maybe what that person is
looking for is someone who is a little
bit under qualified because they want
someone who's coachable and adaptable
and can be flexible in their position
maybe they found that in the past when
they hire candidates who are
overqualified there tends to be higher
turnover maybe there are things like
attitude or company culture fit that are
much more important to the person doing
the hiring than your technical
qualifications so the meaning that you
are making out of you being under
qualified might not at all be accurate
to the meaning the other person makes
out of the same objective information
which is you being under qualified so
even if you're totally aligned on what
you believe is an objective fact like
I'm in x amount of debt or I haven't
achieved X Y or Z things in my career or
I have a certain body part that looks a
certain way you might be really
misaligned on the and that means part of
things you might make a whole bunch
bunch of meaning out of these things
while other people are making totally
different meaning out of it and that's
the part that gets interesting is
looking not just at what we think people
have objectively noticed about us but
what we think they are making that mean
often that's a very direct Gateway into
what we are making that thing mean so
remember there is one point in my life
where I developed really strong
limerence around this person who was in
my social group and I remember telling
myself the story that they would never
want to date me because I'd seen them go
through a couple of relationships and
all of the women they had dated in the
past had a very specific body type and
it was not similar to my body type so I
made this whole story in my head that
despite myself and this other person
getting along super well there was never
a world in which they would want to date
me and I had all of these criticisms
very alive in my brain of what they were
probably thinking about someone who
looked more like me and then I remember
going out with them one day and running
into someone who it turned out was their
ex and this woman was absolutely
gorgeous wonderful person and she had my
exact body type and I remember walking
away from that interaction and going
well maybe they broke up because he
didn't really like the way she looked so
I asked a little bit about the
relationship and he was like yeah I was
always way more into her than she was
into me I really wish that that had
worked out but it ended because she
ghosted me and I remember this feeling
of almost annoyance coming online like I
didn't want him to be attracted to that
girl because that meant there was the
capacity for him to be attracted to me
and now I had to deal with the fact that
there was something else in the way of
me wanting to be with this person and
wanting to pursue them romantically like
I had to go home and grapple with the
fact that I'm deeply afraid of intimacy
which is my least favorite thing to have
to Grapple with because it's so real it
is so much easier for me to just project
superficial reasons onto other people
around why they wouldn't want to be with
me than it was for me at that time to
actually be in my emotional myself and
pursue what I wanted in a vulnerable way
so sometimes when we reclaim our
projections we find out that they're
actually a front for something deeper
and harder for us to Grapple with other
times we find out that there are just
ways in which we're not happy with
ourselves that we actually don't want
other people to accept us for either so
another example of this is there was
someone I got close to a long time ago
who I remember I found particularly
interesting because they had such an
interesting job in my eyes so I made the
subjective value judgment that they had
this really cool career they'd work
themselves into a really interesting
position and there was so much that I
felt like I could learn from that person
but every time I brought up this
person's career to them when we were
hanging out socially I felt like I was
bumping up against a kind of defensive
energy and they would immediately start
talking about the different career that
they were working towards and the
different objectives that they had and
they would start kind of putting down
the position that they were in in their
current job and after this happened a
number of times I was like okay I'm
gonna try addressing this so I just went
hey I think that your work is really
interesting but I'm getting the sense
that you don't really want to talk about
it am I right about that or am I wrong
about that and I will never forget this
they looked at me and said I don't want
you to think that I'm a loser and I was
genuinely floored by that statement
because that was one of those rare
scenarios where that Venn diagram of
things that I was thinking about them
and things that they were thinking I was
thinking about them was just two circles
I thought they were super cool and their
career was really interesting but they
had made this value judgment about their
career that it was uninteresting and
they were uncool for working the job
that they were working so we shared the
same objective piece of information
which is that we both knew what their
job was but they had made it mean
something completely different than I
had made it mean and the more I got to
know this person and the more I spoke to
them I started to get a bigger picture
of what kind of work they wanted to be
doing and what kind of impact they
wanted to be making on the world world
and I realized that by their own
standards this person was considering
themselves to be a loser because they
weren't doing the work that they thought
they should be doing in the world but
instead of owning that as their
self-judgment they would go around
projecting it onto other people and
assuming that everybody was looking at
them and thinking what a big loser when
in reality I didn't know anyone who
thought that of this person but I
thought that that experience served as a
really good example of what happens when
we feel we are not fulfilling our
potential the act of Love of getting
really close to someone whether that is
in a platonic relationship a romantic
relationship a family relationship
whatever it is it the act of being seen
for who we are and accepted for who we
are but if we don't want to accept who
we are or where we're at and we make
some sort of meaning that's highly
negative about where we're at might be
really difficult to welcome in genuine
love if we need people to always see us
as the idealized vision of ourselves
that we have in the future we're always
going to experience a sense of
disconnection from people because people
cannot mirror back to us that which we
are not they can of course mirror back
to us our fantasies but that's not going
to be a healthy or reality-based
relationship but the flip side of this
is not just somebody mirroring all of
the things we hate about ourselves back
to us if we can integrate and come to
terms with the fact that there are
things we don't like about ourselves
things maybe we judge ourselves for
because we have not yet actualized on
something that we believe it would be
truly fulfilling for us to actualize on
that's part of what we can share with
someone instead of getting defensive
anytime they notice that that's not our
current state we can talk to people both
about where we're at and about where
we'd like to get to and about the parts
of ourselves that we're not super happy
with right now and that's the kind of
thing that Fosters true deep Intimacy in
connections sharing things like our
insecurities with other people and
giving them the chance in real life to
reject us for them if they are going to
that's a very vulnerable act and that
vulnerability is the kind of stuff that
real deep connections can get built on
if the other person is ready to meet us
there but in order to Foster those types
of intimate connections what we need to
get comfortable doing is putting down
the meaning that we make around all of
those things if I decide I need x amount
of money in order for someone to want to
date me I'm never giving myself the
opportunity to go on a date with someone
figure out if that's something that
matters to them and then find out if we
could be a match or not but let's say I
absorb and integrate my own insecurity
around not having a certain amount of
money then I can go on a date and say
hey here's what I do here's what I earn
and here's the direction I'm really
interested in moving in here's what
excites me about earning more money or
here's this side hustle that I'm really
curious about or I would like to earn
more money but I haven't really figured
out how to do it yet and right now
what's more important to me is balancing
my mental health or my family life or
whatever it is but now we're giving
someone the opportunity to actually
connect with us because we've owned our
insecurities instead of deciding that
they're thinking those things about us
and we're actually offering someone the
chance to connect with us on those
insecurities instead of just distancing
ourselves from both our insecurities and
other people by virtue of us projecting
those insecurities onto them when I
think back to that friend I had who was
so insecure about their job I remember
thinking about it after we had that
initial conversation and going well it's
not really just their job that I was
interested in when it came to getting to
know them and wanting to get to know
them better it was also the type of
person who would find themselves in that
field of work I was curious about what
drove them what motivated them what
interested them in the work that they
had done and I remember thinking that
the type of person who had done the work
that they had done was likely just the
kind of person who I would be curious
about period it didn't matter to me if
they completely abandoned their line of
work and chose a new one what was
interesting to me was the person behind
the actions and what kind of qualities
and substance made that person up and at
the end of the day that's usually what
we're looking for when it comes to human
connection we're looking to figure out
who is the person behind all of this and
all of those inner tensions and the gaps
between where we are and where we're
trying to get to are what's interesting
about a person a person with no tension
in their life or in their inner world is
like a TV show with no plot nothing's
moving in any direction so a lot of the
time the things that were the most
afraid people are going to perceive in
us are actually the things that make us
the most human Ergo the most interesting
but if we pre-decide we're going to be
rejected for something what we're often
doing is coming into the situation with
really weird energy if I think I'm
unattractive and I go on a date with
someone who I've decided in my head
thinks that I'm unattractive I'm
probably not going to be approaching
them with a lot of warmth because I'm
already mad at them inside my own mind
for what I think they're thinking about
me despite the fact that they might
think I'm very attractive or the
physical qualities I'm judging myself
for might mean almost nothing to them
maybe they're attracted to me for
completely different reasons but then if
I go in and give off this weird
defensive energy I'm probably going to
kill any chance of some sort of
meaningful Vibe developing between us
same goes for going into a job interview
and deciding that they're not going to
give you the job because of some
criteria that you think makes you
disqualifiable for it maybe what they're
looking for is just confidence and
flexibility and those are the two things
you're definitely not going to bring
with you into the interview if you've
already decided in your head that you're
going to get rejected so at the end of
the day I really like the principle of
just letting external rejections happen
externally if they're gonna happen think
about how different your life would be
if you decided I'm not going to
pre-reject myself for things I'm going
to go ahead and let other people reject
me that is often how people get things
that everybody else is baffled by right
they decide that if this is a no for
somebody else I'm going to let them
actually say no to me but I'm going to
try for the job the relationship
whatever it is that I want and if it's a
yes for the other person then great we
both win but living in this way is scary
because a lot of us get something out of
externalizing our projection it's hard
for us to accept what we don't like
about ourselves the things we're judging
ourselves for and or the deeper wounds
that we're bearing underneath our
self-judgments but the more we open
ourselves up to the process of getting
really clear on what meaning we're
making out of these things that we
believe other people are already or will
reject us for the more clear we get on
where we have those internal blocks and
then we can use what we find to figure
out is this either an area that I want
to do Growth work in or is this an area
that I would like to accept myself for
or is this insecurity hiding a deeper
insecurity maybe it feels easier for me
to believe that I'm going to be rejected
based on my looks than it is to believe
that someone could get to know me and
just go yeah I don't like you that much
I don't like your personality so a lot
of the time the hard part is not ceasing
to project onto other people it's being
willing to accept that the things and
the judgment events that we project onto
others are actually judgments we have
internally that we need to spend some
genuine time with unpacking but the more
we can do that the more we learn about
ourselves and the more we're working
with honest information because we're
getting at the core of what's really
happening for us all right that's all I
have to say for today on the topic of
projecting our insecurities onto other
people and I want to be clear
insecurities are not the only thing that
we project outwards so not everything
that we're projecting is an insecurity
not every insecurity is something we
project but this does tend to be a
really common one for a lot of people so
it felt worthwhile to address it during
Shadow week as always let me know what
you guys are thinking feeling
experiencing as you go through this
video I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really soon
thank you
[Music]