hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here this month on this
channel we're going to be talking about
Intimate
Relationships so what I mean by that is
relationships with people who we tend to
co-regulate with or consider attachment
figures so that can mean a romantic
partner it can mean a parent or a family
member it can mean a close friend but in
any case what we're going to be going
over is not just how to devel Vel the
skills internally to work through your
own wounding which is much of what we
focus on in this channel but also how to
develop the tools to create deeper
intimacy inside of our relationships
which is in large part about recognizing
which Tendencies keep us away from it so
today what we're going to be starting
off with is an exploration of the
concept of people pleasing I generally
don't love the term people pleasing I
feel as though it's a little bit of a
projection so often when we're doing
things because we want to feel validated
or liked or like we are kind people we
call it peop pleasing but it actually
works against us when it comes to
developing intimacy intimacy requires us
to be known and being known by another
person means sharing the ways in which
we disagree with them or have dissent
inside of the relationship and what
we're going to talk about today is how
that constru of people pleasing of
believing that to be close to someone we
always have to give them whatever it is
that we think they want from us gets in
the way of us developing actual
sustainable relationships so what we
think is bringing us closer to people is
actually often driving a wedge between
ourselves and them so first off we're
going to talk about this concept more
generally and we're going to look at the
sequence of events that makes people
pleasing lead to a lack of intimacy as
well as how that could happen
differently and then we're going to go
over how this tends to uniquely show up
in insecurely attached relation
relationships so relationships where
both people have insecure attachment
Styles whether that is avoidant anxious
fearful avoidant any combination of
those and then we're going to look at
how we can start slowly changing the
pattern if that's the type of
relationship you find yourself in so
that you're no longer evading intimacy
through people pleasing and instead
you're staying more connected to
yourself and consequently more connected
in an authentic way to your partner or
to your friend or to your parent or to
whoever it is that you would like to
develop more intimacy with so we're
going to start by going over what this
generally looks like there's often a
moment in relationship that causes Panic
inside of most of us who air insecurely
attached whether that's anxious avoidant
or fearful avoidant the moment of panic
will show up differently but it will be
there where we realize that someone
we're in close connection with thinks
differently than us about something so
we have a moment of internal dissent
inside of the relationship maybe they
share an opinion that we don't agree
with maybe they say something to us that
we think is a projection so they're
saying something about our character or
about the way we're acting that we don't
agree is true to our experience maybe
they're saying something about
themselves that we don't agree with or
that kind of strikes us as not true
about the ways in which we've observed
their character whatever it is we arrive
at this moment of explicit internal
dissent so we do not agree with
something that the other person is
saying or explaining to us and when we
arrive at that moment we have a couple
of options one is the lowrisk low reward
option which is to self- abandon and
fake agreement so basically pretending
that we believe or think the same thing
that they do even if that's not
necessarily true now the reason why this
is low risk is pretty obvious we bypass
the risk of conflict which we might fear
will lead to rejection or some sort sort
of emotional upheaval that we're not
prepared to deal with but it's not
always as obvious why this is low reward
the reason this is low reward is because
the only place that self-abandonment and
faking agreement can lead us to is
pseudo intimacy pseudo intimacy is what
happens when both people are
collaborating on a shared fantasy now
both people might be conscious that this
is the case or only one might be
conscious that it's the case so someone
says something to you you disagree with
them but you don't tell them that you
tell them I agree that's totally true
let's go with what you think now they
are in a fantasy that the two of you
think the same thing the reason it's a
fantasy and not reality is because in
actuality you do not think the same
thing as them so you have presented a
fantasy version of yourself to them
which they are now in relationship with
and you are in a false relationship as
well because if you are pretending to
agree with something that you actually
don't agree with especially if it's
relatively significant you are not in
genuine relationship with the other
because the other is giving you input
whether that's validation or affection
or appreciation based on who you are
pretending to be and real you the actual
you who has those opinions behind that
mask is no longer in relationship with
this other so the best you can have in
that situation is pseudo intimacy this
idea that you are connected and that you
are on the same page when one or both of
you knows that that is not the truth so
you're not connecting authentic self to
authentic self now let's look at the
other option when we're presented with
this moment of recognizing descent
inside of ourselves the other option is
highrisk high reward which is voicing
your descent this can lead to a
multitude of possible outcomes so
letting someone know either I disagree
with you or that doesn't resonate for me
or there's something that I feel angry
about related to what you said whatever
it is that is at odds with how you
believe the other person wants you to
respond getting overtly brought up can
lead to a variety of different responses
one is that the other person can self-
abandon they can actually go into that
fond response or that insincere response
back off what they said pretend they
agree with your perception of things and
then you're back inside of that pseudo
intimacy sharing dissent can also lead
to that big bad thing we're all afraid
of which is rejection or abandonment
maybe the other person is not ready to
hear that you don't agree with them
maybe they're unwilling to entertain
your point of view because in some way
it's threatening to them and the way
that they see the world and so instead
they're going to cut off contact with
you temporarily or permanently and
you're going to find yourself partially
or totally out of connection but there's
also a third option and this is the one
that unfortunately though most of us
never consciously want to go through it
is the only thing that's going to end up
building more Intimacy in moments where
descent is experienced and that is
experiencing conflict now when I say the
word conflict most people immediately
think of yelling and screaming and
insulting each other but insecure
relationships healthy self-responsible
conflict is a humongous factor that goes
into building intimacy and the reason
for that is because conflict is the
thing that occurs when two people are at
odds in the way that they see the world
or their relationship or each other and
they are willing to share those things
to arrive at a new understanding now is
that an optimistic view of the outcome
of conflict yes totally conflict can go
in a lot of different directions so
we're not here to push under the rug the
fact that this is a risky option again
high risk High reward when you engage in
Conflict when you're willing to say I
disagree with what you were saying or I
feel a sense of anger or frustration or
rejection in relation to what you're
saying anything you share with another
person that implies anything other than
alignment with their point of view has
the potential to lead to conflict and
get you into a space where you're trying
to work out ideally through honest means
what you can arrive at in terms of
figuring out the truth of course not
everyone knows how to fight fair not
everyone knows how to handle conflict
and especially in instances where we're
more threatened by the conflict or what
it would mean if we were not right than
we are interested in preserving the
relationship that conflict can once
again lead to rejection or abandonment
so this is not the no-risk option but if
conflict can be handled well if both
people can be more committed to finding
the truth and preserving the
relationship than they are to cling to
their own stories about how they see the
world there is the potential to move
into this beautiful stage where you're
exploring and finding ways to integrate
the conflicting points of view that you
have and this is without a doubt one of
the most beautiful components of secure
relationships is that people are
actually able to challenge each other
with care and compassion work through
the ego stuff that comes up when they're
in disagreement and as a product of both
people having different perspectives on
the world actually arrive at a greater
more expanded View of what they
originally thought was the truth and the
very cool thing about going through that
stage where you're both able ideally to
lay your cards on the table and go
here's what I think and feel in an
honest and vulnerable way and that part
matters and the other person is able to
do the same if you can work through that
stage with mutual humility and a
commitment to preserving each other's
dignity you can arrive at true intimacy
true intimacy is when you are in a
shared reality rather than a shared
fantasy when you have true intimacy with
another person you are privy to the
internal world of what they truly think
and what they truly believe and they are
privy to your internal world as well and
this is also an area where something
really cool and kind of magical can
happen which is that through both of you
sharing your conflicting perspectives
but respecting each other enough to take
each other's perspectives ser seriously
and entertain them honestly you can
arrive at a much greater understanding
of the world and how it works as well as
yourself and how you work and this other
person and how they work than you ever
could have arrived at on your own
because this is precisely how we grow
through relationships right it's not
about finding someone who yes man
everything you do or who you put up on a
pedestal and replace all of Your World
Views with their World Views it's about
finding someone who thinking genuinely
challenging is yours because you have
true respect for them and because they
have true respect for you so something
that's worth noting here is that it's
really hard to get to intimacy if you
don't have that mutual respect if one
person or the other is more attached to
the idea that they are right and the
other person is wrong than they are to
entertaining the other person's
worldview as true to them and figuring
out where the wires are getting crossed
it's almost impossible to arrive at
intimacy intimacy can only occur in
relationships that are not treated as a
zero sum gain so believing that every
argument has a winner and a loser that
one person is right and the other is
wrong is a way to never achieve any form
of intimacy and you might be sitting
here thinking but there's instances
where the other person is obviously and
blatantly incorrect they are saying
something that I know to be false and in
that case the idea is to focus Less on
what is the objective truth and focus
more on what what is the subjective
Truth for this person if I have a
partner or a friend who believes
something that I think is blatantly
unequivocally wrong we are in an
intimate exchange the moment that I let
them know that that's what I believe it
doesn't mean I have to be cruel about it
it doesn't mean I have to belittle them
or write them off as irrational or
unintelligent it just means that in
order for me to truly be seen by this
other person I can't be holding this
secret descent they can go on being
wrong and I can go on believing they're
wrong and as long as we're both aware of
that fact we can actually still be in
Intimate connection that magical thing
that happens of arriving at a greater
truth or a more expanded perspective
through integrating your opposing points
of view doesn't always happen but it's
also not necessary for intimacy all
intimacy means is that we're not keeping
significant secrets from each other
we're not lying or self- abandoning in
an ATT attempt to keep in the connection
again beyond what is reasonable this
does not mean that you have to let your
partner or friend know every time you
think they don't look so great today or
other things that don't necessarily
create large problems within the
relationship so it doesn't feel like
it's something you're holding back so
intensely that you're just living This
Lie by being in the relationship but the
important thing to note here is that if
you look at this flowchart there is
never a route to intimacy that includes
self-abandonment or people pleasing as
soon as we are consciously being
dishonest with the other person we're
taking the opportunity for intimacy off
of the table altogether and the only way
to start working our way towards
Intimacy in relationships is to be
willing and Define strategies which
we're going to speak at length about for
the remainder of this month for staying
in connection honestly again this does
not mean being brutal or harsh or
malicious in our honesty but it does
mean giving ourselves a Fighting Chance
at establishing real intimacy with
people by refusing to pretend we agree
with things that we don't so this is
kind of the traditional route towards
either forming or avoiding intimacy but
what I want to spend some time talking
about now is how this shows up in
mutually insecurely attached
relationships so there's this factor
that comes into play when you're dealing
with mutual insecure attachment which is
the role of ego defenses and when I say
ego defenses I don't mean this in a
negative
sense entirely there certainly negative
things that come out of this what I mean
by an ego defense is any sort of action
that we take that is not completely
authentic but that serves some survival
purpose for us all insecure attachment
responses are ego defenses this is not
synonymous with the term egotistical if
you are playing out an attachment
Behavior you are not necessarily on an
ego high but what it means is that you
are temporarily abandoning authenticity
whether you're aware of it or not and
you usually are not in order to behave
in a way that you believe on a deep
instinctual level is going to ensure
your survival whether that means keeping
someone close or whether it means
keeping yourself self-reliant now what's
so tricky about ego defenses inside of
relationships is that when we are in an
ego defense so when we are acting out
our attachment wounding or a trauma
response we often believe that what we
are saying or doing is the truth I think
that many of the most challenging
interactions people have especially
inside of romantic relationships are the
product of ego story clashing up against
ego story and both people being
resistant to looking at the actual truth
either because it's too threatening or
because they actually don't have the
skills developed to know what the truth
is so let's give an example of what this
looks like let's say you are in a
relationship with an insecurely attached
partner and they share an ego story so
they share something that comes from
their own defensive patterning as though
it is the truth and they truly believe
that it is so this might look like a
partner telling you that you are being a
rational or that your feelings are in
some capacity false or made up when you
do not believe that that's true or an
ego defense might look like your partner
accusing you that you don't love them or
don't care about them based on something
you said or did when your truth is that
that is not true and you do feel as
though you care about and love them both
of these are examples of ego defenses
being shared as though they are true
because the person sharing them actually
believes in that moment or overall that
they are true so how do we deal with
this this leads us to a new potential
Choice point where we have the option
should we so take it and often this
happens unconsciously for a lot of us to
adopt their ego defense or their
worldview as our own so we're being told
that we're rational and especially when
we're children this is something we are
highly susceptible to and instead of
going wait a minute this feels like a
very real experience for me like a very
real emotional response that I'm having
as a result of the environment I'm in we
go you're right I must be behaving
irrationally we adopt their ego defense
as our own worldview and now we are back
in pseudo Intimacy in this case both
people are sharing the fantasy that
something was irrational or had no basis
in reality when in fact that's not the
case this is a very common form of
pseudo intimacy that happens between a
avoidant leaning parents and their
children if their children are adopting
and developing the same type of avoidant
patterning or let's say your partner
keeps accusing you of not caring about
them or not loving them and you start to
really question yourself and internalize
that and go well I thought that I loved
and cared about them but maybe I'm wrong
maybe I'm actually a very terrible
person who doesn't care about other
people now you're adopting that ego
story as your own story about yourself
and you are once again in pseudo
intimacy you both believe that you are
truly a callous and uncaring person who
lacks empathy when in reality that might
not be the case but of course this could
go another way it is possible that when
your partner or your friend or your
family member shares an ego story you
might have that moment of dissent of
going wait a minute that doesn't totally
Sound True to me in this moment I'm
going to trust my intuition I'm going to
recognize that I don't have the same
story about the world that this person
has which by the way has nothing to do
with right and wrong noticing descent is
just noticing I don't agree with what's
happening there's Discord here and then
you're back at that choice point where
you can go low risk low reward or
high-risk High reward and the cool thing
is that a lot of what earning secure
attachment is is about adding in a
moment of pause between someone else
sharing and you accepting it as truth or
immediately rejecting it both of which
could be an ego response the more
security we earn the more flexibility
and freedom we have in our thinking so
instead of automatically needing to
either accept a premise when someone
offers us one or reject it depending on
what feels more adaptive for us we can
actually add in a moment where we pause
and check in with ourselves where we
entertain what they're saying think
about it ask ourselves in
is this something I agree with or don't
agree with and then choose our response
from there this doesn't mean that we're
always going to go into conflict
sometimes if it feels unsafe to engage
in Conflict momentary self-abandonment
in the interest of keeping ourselves
safe is a viable option but what's
important is that we don't mistake it
for True intimacy we understand that if
we can't be honest with someone we also
can't have intimacy with them we we can
have other forms of relationships maybe
they're a friend that we can share
activities with or maybe there's someone
who we can catch up with now and again
but if there isn't the ability to be
honest there isn't the capacity for
intimacy I was at this Workshop one time
where we were doing an exercise that
centered around accessing our own
humility so we would sit in front of
another person and ask them some
question or something that we were
struggling with in our lives and then we
would practice taking whatever answer
they gave us as the absolute truth so
just considering and being willing and
staying open to the idea that whatever
they were saying however ridiculous and
some people went really ridiculous with
it just for fun was the absolute core
truth so what does it feel like to
entertain that and I remember sitting in
front of the person who was my Guru in
that moment when I was the one in the
energy of humility and asking them how
do I stay in touch with the people close
to me and the guy I was doing the
exercise with looked at me and said to
stay always in touch with the other
prioritize staying always in touch with
the
self and after we finished the exercise
he kind of laughed about it and he was
like I don't know I just kind of came up
with that on the spot and I was like no
no that was one of the truest things I
think anyone has ever said to me in my
life the idea that in order to stay in
connection with other people we have to
be in brutally honest connection with
ourselves is absolutely true when it
comes to maintaining intimacy because to
stay in true connection with another we
have to be able to share what's true and
alive for us with them and we cannot do
that if we are not in touch with
ourselves our own thoughts our own
feelings our own beliefs the only way to
stay in that connection is to stay
perpetually connected to self if there's
one thing any of us take away from this
video it's that the idea here is that
intimacy can cannot exist where
self-abandonment is occurring we have to
be willing to share what's true for us
risk rejection risk abandonment risk
conflict and I want to note that the
healthier the relationship is the less
likelihood there is that sharing descent
is going to lead to abandonment or
rejection so the healthier that your
relationships get the more likely it is
that conflict is actually going to be a
really generative process that brings
you to that magical third space of
understanding something with great
nuance and complexity than you
previously were able to but to Kickstart
that entire process you have to be
really committed to staying connected to
yourself your in the- moment thoughts
feelings body States and being willing
to not abandon your connection to any of
that all right I think that's all I have
to say for today on the topic of
intimacy people pleasing or
self-abandonment and how authentic
connection to ourselves and other people
is what actually gets us to those deep
forms of connection that have the bones
to withstand even the greatest
relationship
challenges as always let me know what
your thinking feeling experiencing as
you go through this video I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really
[Music]
soon