hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here
today we're talking about the experience
of finding closure within a relationship
that has ended badly so whether that
means you had a romantic or friendship
or family relationship end in the middle
of a fight whether it means somebody
passed away at a point where you had
unfinished business with them
most of us have experienced some aspect
of feeling like we need closure that we
don't have
so before we get too into things we're
going to talk about what I mean when I
say the term closure so in any
relationship that involves true intimacy
between two people
there is a cycle that the relationship
tends to go through over and over again
throughout the entire course of both
people's lives
and this cycle goes from connection so
what is it to be in connection with
someone it means to have a shared set of
contacts so a shared understanding a
shared set of meanings about the way in
which you are interpreting the world and
your relationship with one another
and when we're in connection with
someone in that way we are offered the
opportunity to see ourselves through
their eyes in a way that gives us each A
New Perspective on ourselves so to be in
that state of connection is to be in the
state where we are seeing the world to
some degree in the same way and Through
The Eyes of another and also seeing
ourselves in a new way through the eyes
of another
now what inevitably happens with any
close relationship is at some point
there is a rupture
so a rupture is the place where that set
of shared meanings and understandings
that you have in some capacity large or
small breaks down so where there was
once alignment there is no longer
alignment in some small or large way
and what we want to have happen in most
cases after a rupture exists is we want
to go into repair
so we want to come back together with
that person and find a way to make the
relationship big enough to now include
both perspectives that were initially at
odds and when that happens successfully
we go back into that state of connection
and I would call this reconnection
because you're coming back into that
connection that you have with the other
person with a more expanded
deeper and more mature shared
perspective because you've now
integrated these differing points of
view so what does it mean to not have
closure in a relationship to not have
closure in a relationship means to
arrive at the point of rupture and get
stranded there so to not have a means of
moving the relationship from rupture to
repair
and there is a step that I believe is
extremely important in between rupture
and repair that rarely gets talked about
and that step is the step of remorse and
re-evaluation so when we arrive at a
place of rupture in a relationship what
tends to happen is we feel a sense of
Shame
shame is the natural response to falling
out of connection with another person
and if we are reasonably secure in our
understanding of ourselves and other
people that shame helps us understand
where the differences of opinion
happened what we may have done that was
not particularly loving or respectful of
the other or ourselves and how we need
to behave differently in order to
re-enter the relationship in a healthier
way however if we do not have a
particularly secure view of ourself and
others what we're going to do when we
feel shame in the rupture process is try
to speed right through it and go either
too quickly into repair which could look
like just trying to get the other
person's forgiveness when we haven't
really spent time unpacking and
understanding how we're going to show up
differently in the future or which
boundaries we're going to need to set
within the relationship to keep
ourselves protected inside of it in the
future or we might go into anger blame
externalizing mode right we might try to
offload The Shame by getting very angry
critical and judgmental of the other
person and trying to get them to accept
complete and total responsibility for
that rupture so when we are seeking
closure in a relationship it means we
are trying to move back into that state
of reconnection so we're trying to go
from either rupture or remorse
reevaluation back into repair and
reconnection now this doesn't mean that
the relationship necessarily continues
right
a lot of relationships particularly when
both people air more secure actually end
in a state of connection
so you have a rupture
both people take the time to evaluate
what went wrong and figure out okay if
our perspectives are different in this
way
is it possible or is it desirable for me
to continue a relationship with this
person
and if the answer is no then we go into
repair we talk about where our
perceptions or our values are too
different to continue a relationship
with each other and arriving back at
that State of reconnection means that
the shared meaning we now have is that
we are not the right romantic partners
for each other or we are not the right
friends for each other or it does not
make particular sense for us to remain
close however there is a sense of mutual
respect and a sense of a shared
understanding about what happened within
the relationship and why it is not a
feasible one to continue
so that's what it looks like to part
ways from a state of connection to part
ways in a state of disconnection so to
end a relationship in the stage of
rupture means to allow the relationship
to end in such a way where your
differing perspectives are not
integrated
so there was something you disagreed on
there is maybe ways you were viewing
each other that each person did not feel
adequately represented by
and to walk away from the relationship
in that place means to walk away from a
relationship in which you feel as though
the person you are is not represented
adequately inside the eyes of this other
person so there is a natural craving to
want to at least arrive at a place of
understanding and shared meaning with
that other person
and it can be incredibly painful for a
relationship to end from a place of
rupture because what does that leave us
with that sense of Shame that arises
when we have fallen out of connection
with another person and something I want
to make clear at this point is that a
lot of us go into repair work in a
relationship from that place of toxic
shame that place of kind of panic I just
need this other person to tell me I'm
okay so that I can believe I'm okay
again
and so we can tell ourselves this story
I want to repair the relationship
because I am selfless because I felt
this shame I immediately assumed the
shame meant I am bad and the other
person is good and so now I want to go
apologize express my remorse and repair
this relationship so that I can once
again start to see myself as good
through the other person's eyes but when
we're in this place of telling ourselves
that we are selfless and we just want to
repair and apologize to the other person
for their sake
really ask yourself if this is the space
you're in if this person is refusing my
apology if they are refusing to get back
in connection with me
is it truly respecting them as an
autonomous and Sovereign human being who
is separate for me to continuously
trying to push a form of repair that
they don't seem to want
if someone does not want to move into
repair with us the truly selfless thing
to do is to allow them to walk away with
whatever they want to walk away with
with whatever pain it is psychologically
protective for them to continue holding
on to if we are truly behaving
selflessly we will respect their choice
to not be back in connection with us and
so now we must accept that if the truly
kind thing to do is to let that person
go
how do we take care of ourselves with
what's left over
so we are stuck in this place of rupture
in this place potentially of remorse
where we are parsing through what we did
wrong in that relationship what we wish
had been different the ways in which we
wish we had treated ourselves and the
other person differently
and we are left to do repair work with
the version of ourselves that existed
within that relationship and so this
video is going to talk about how we work
with that shame in order to repair the
relationship that we have with ourselves
in reference to that other
so what do I mean by that
every time we have a relationship with
someone we are having a relationship
with two people
one is that other person as they exist
in real time as a living breathing human
entity who is separate from us
the other person we're having a
relationship with is ourselves Through
The Eyes of that other so in every
relationship we have there are unique
parts of ourselves and of our experience
of being alive that gets mirrored back
to us through another person there are
certain energies within us there are
certain wounds that get triggered that
are unique to our relationship with that
other
and so when we are navigating any
relationship of any capacity we are
managing both the way we're relating to
that person but also the way we are
relating to ourselves through that
person
okay and what I'm going to present in
this video is the idea that in order to
find closure we don't necessarily need
to arrive at a place of repair with that
other person as they exist in reality
what we need is to arrive at a place of
repair and reconnection with the version
of ourselves that existed within that
relationship
and that will get us back into that Loop
of connection that will allow us to feel
settled and move on with the closure
that we need so I remember when I was
around 26 years old I was at a retreat
in South America and I was talking about
the relationship that I had had with my
father
who had passed away some years ago and I
remember the shaman looking at me
and going while you talk about this
relationship in the past tense
and I went yeah of course like my dad is
dead I don't know if you were paying
attention but this relationship is no
longer ongoing and he went your father's
relationship with you has ended because
he has passed away
your relationship with your father will
continue to change and grow and evolve
as long as you are alive
because the things that your father
brought out in you
the ways in which you developed and
formed as a product of being raised by
your father are still very much active
and Alive within you
and you will be working with those
energies those perceptions those
patterns of belief that arose as a
result of your relationship with your
father for the rest of your life
and I believe this is true of every
single relationship we ever have
as long as we are alive we are still in
some capacity in relationship with
everyone we have ever had a connection
with
the way that that person exists inside
of our minds inside of our memories the
emotions that we felt through knowing
that person the perspectives we were
exposed to they all stay alive inside of
us
so the version of ourselves that we were
within that relationship persists even
after that person has left our lives
and so to move to the place of remorse
and re-evaluation even without the other
person's help means to sit in that space
of Shame and really look at where your
perceptions stopped matching up where
that connection with the other literal
person who exists in real time fell
apart
and what can I learn from that if I am
in that space What understanding of
myself and the way that I show up in the
world and the way that I show up towards
other people
do I have now that I did not have prior
to this rupture happening what is my
shame telling me about what I may have
done wrong whether that means failing to
protect the other person from me and my
own triggers and my own biases or
failing to protect myself from the other
person's biases and triggers
and in some capacity most relationships
involve two people trying to offload
their shame and self-loathing onto each
other
so in a moment someone gets triggered
and we try to go blah get this feeling
of Shame out of me I'm going to make it
your fault I'm going to make this way
that I am feeling your responsibility by
telling you it is yours not mine
and to sit in that place of rupture
of remorse and of reevaluation means to
properly put everything back in its
place
so to go here is the shame I tried to
offload onto the other person actually
that's mine to integrate and metabolize
here's the shame the other person tried
to offload on to me actually that's
theirs I'm not going to accept it as a
part of my self-concept
and so we can work in this space with
the relationship that we have with
ourselves and get really clear on where
we end and the other person begins
and in an Ideal World this would be the
exact process that happens before we
move to repair even in a relationship
where both people are wanting to
willingly participate in the repair
process
we would both take time to work with the
shame that comes from a rupture to
understand the situation more clearly
and arrive at the place of repair with a
truly deepened understanding of who we
are in relation to this other person and
who they are in relation to us both for
better and for worse and the reason why
repair can feel so good is because we
have the new understandings and the new
perceptions that we formed in the
remorse and reevaluation process
confirmed and mirrored back to us by the
other and if I'm going up to the other
and going hey I realized we were getting
some things muddled up but this is me
this is where I End and You Begin and
they can mirror that back to me and go
yes that is where you end and I begin
and you can do the same for them you now
have a new understanding of yourself an
expanded and more mature understanding
of yourself that they are mirroring back
to you and that can feel really
phenomenal and that is exactly what the
growth process in any intimate
relationship looks like
however
if you don't have that mirror because
the other person refuses to hear you out
after you've done that remorse and
reevaluation process you're probably
going to be left craving that because at
the end of the day we all understand
ourselves through other people's eyes we
need to be reflected back to ourselves
through other people in order to develop
an accurate understanding of ourselves
and so what I want to make clear is that
if you are left with that energy
that energy of having sat with something
understood the ways in which your
relationship to another person was
perhaps unhealthy the ways in which you
may have offloaded your shame onto them
in a way that was not fair
the ways in which you responded to that
person that you want to respond
differently going forward
there is still a way to get that
mirrored back to you
the way you're going to get that
mirrored back to you is by reminding
yourself that you are going to meet this
person again
just not in the physical body that they
came around in the first time you are
going to meet this person again in small
ways in hundreds of interactions over
the course of your lifetime with other
people
I have met my dad again since he died
inside of other people I have met my
ex-partners again inside of other people
the energy that those specific people
brought out in us will be brought out in
us again in some small way over the
course of our lives inside of other
relationships
and if we have truly done the repair
work if we have truly worked out
internally here's where I end and the
other person begins here's how I will
not show up in a way that is harmful
towards myself or others when I
encounter this energy again in my life
we are going to be able to find the
mirroring that we need through those
relationships with other people who
bring up that same type of energy within
us so the relationship with ourselves
that we had with that other person when
we knew them continues to grow and
evolve and we will continue to find
mirrors for the work that we did within
that relationship and for the growth
that happened through it inside of other
people who may be kind of trigger us the
same way that person who is now no
longer a part of our Lives used to
trigger us or who excite Us in the same
ways
we will have the opportunity to meet
those parts of ourselves again if we are
staying honest and open in our
connections with other people and that's
ultimately how we arrive at that place
of repair and reconnection we figure out
not just how we would prefer to approach
that person who left our lives
differently if they were ever to come
back into it but how we will treat them
the next time we meet them inside of
someone else how we will respond
differently in those moments to how we
did in the past the first time I met my
dad after he died I had a very healing
interaction with what was once a very
negative and unresolved State because I
took the time to work with that energy
to figure out my own protective
boundaries around myself in a way that I
did not have with that person while he
was alive and the next time I met him
inside of somebody else I knew how to
show up for myself and so my
relationship with my father who passed
away many years ago continues to change
and evolve
my relationship with past partners
continues to change and evolve through
the ways that I no longer allow myself
to offload my shame onto other people in
the moments that I feel triggered by
anyone in the ways that I used to feel
triggered in past romantic relationships
and I also know how to draw boundaries
around other people offloading their
shame onto me
everyone I've ever let go of in my life
I have met again inside of someone else
or some other situation and I have
eventually had the opportunity to see
the ways in which I have changed as a
result of sitting with the shame of that
rupture and drawing new rules for how to
interact with other people and myself
mirrored back to me in those
interactions
and in some cases those interactions
pointed out that I still have more work
to do right
but at the end of the day the point of
all of this is that to gain closure you
don't necessarily need to move into a
state of repair with the other person
you can do that repair work with
yourself with the version of yourself
that existed at one point in time in
connection with that other and find a
way to make sure that the next time that
energy gets triggered in you you will
respond differently you will not be
stuck in that state of Shame and
Desperation forever and the nuts and
bolts of how we do this how we work with
intense shame is something that I am
going to leave for another video because
that is a large topic
but for now I just wanted to be clear
that we don't need to reconnect with
other people who don't want to reconnect
with us or who have died in order to get
closure we can give it to ourselves by
doing that repair cycle internally and
finding the mirrors we eventually need
in other people all right that's all I'm
going to say for today as always I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children
and I will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]