hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here this month on this
channel we've been talking about
intimacy so how to develop deepen and
Foster intimate connections with anyone
in your life who you'd like to get
closer to and to cap things off now that
we're at the end of the month I want to
talk about a specific problem that a lot
of people who end up on some type of
attachment healing Journey or who end up
otherwise entrenched in self-work face
at some point or another which is the
problem of feeling like you are
developing in these new ways and you are
trying to relate to the world and to
yourself and to other people in a way
that is very different from the way
you've done so in the past and noticing
that this is causing disruptions inside
of your personal relationships so I
think that a lot of people have this
kind of deeply rooted fear that they're
going to heal in a direction that takes
them away from their closest most
intimate
connections and so what we're going to
do today is do a little bit of unpacking
around that phenomenon so why is it that
this is the case why is it that our
growth or our development or any change
that either party makes inside of a
close relationship can serve as a threat
to the relational Dynamic and how do we
go about managing that threat so if we
want to keep healing keep growing keep
doing work on ourselves but there's
people we really don't want to leave
behind how can we maximize our chances
of maintaining those relationships and
potentially even allowing them to grow
and flourish into something completely
new I believe that there is absolutely
an art form to this and it's one that
can be incredibly fruitful for all
people involved so something I remember
reading and just otherwise coming across
while I was at this point of trying to
figure out how to navigate these
changing relationships is the idea that
when you start changing when you start
showing up in a healthier way other
people are unconsciously going to start
trying to push you back into your old
roles or your old habits or your own
unhealthy behaviors and I want to say I
think that this is absolutely true for
the most part however there are
different ways that we could interpret
bad right so we could look at this as
other people want us to stay unhealthy
they want to stay blind to their own bad
behavior or they need us to serve as the
scapegoat for them so they are going to
be highly resistant to our healing and
it's possible that in some cases this is
true this is not to Discount the fact
that there are deeply unhealthy systems
we might be entrenched in
interpersonally that may have a genuine
vested interest in US remaining
unhealthy but there's also the
possibility to take a more charitable
interpretation of other people's
behavior when they start to feel
threatened by our growth and that
charitable interpretation might be that
they just want to keep connecting with
us but they don't know how now that we
are changing in some significant way so
I remember kind of hitting this point in
my own attachment healing Journey where
I started getting really annoyed by the
fact that my friends would always talk
to me about the Romantic relationship I
was in at the time in a very kind of
light-hearted way they would just
default to making jokes or making light
of whatever pain or struggle I was going
through and the thing is for many many
years that was exactly how I approach
any pain in my life or any challenge I
would make light of it I would be
self-deprecating I would tell a joke so
that it didn't feel as heavy or as real
to me or to other people and I remember
one point bringing it up with my
therapist and going you know I'm really
frustrated because I'm trying to talk
about my relationships in a more
grounded and mature way and I'm trying
to take a very different approach and
take my life more seriously than I have
in the past but I feel like my friends
are very resistant to it I feel like
they just keep coming at me with this
same old energy of making light of
things and I don't know what to do about
that and I'll never forget him telling
me well tidy that's how they know how to
connect with you this has been the norm
inside of those relationships for a
decade plus they probably have no idea
how to make a connection with you as the
person you're becoming now because that
version of you is still brand new to you
never mind them so of course they're
going to feel a little bit panicked when
you're not receiving the bids for
connection that they are giving you that
have worked so well for the entirety of
the time that they've known you
and I remember being struck by what an
empathetic and charitable approach that
was so looking at what I was
interpreting as people trying to push me
into past patterning that was no longer
working for me as people simply giving
me bids for connection that I was now
shooting down which was probably making
them feel very insecure and distressed
inside of the relationship so what we're
going to talk about is a three-step
process for figuring out whether a
relationship is going to be able to
change alongside you or whether it's
something that you need to give some
space and of course there are tons of
gray areas in between here but if you
have a particular relationship whether
it's your romantic relationship your
close friends your family Dynamics and
you really want to see if you can build
it into something new here are the
things I'm going to recommend you try
step number one of three is going to be
getting super clear with yourself on
which underlying cont contracts are
governing your relationship with that
person so this is probably something you
have never had to consciously think
about before and a good book that serves
as a resource for this though it is
incredibly Antiquated in many of its
views because it's from I believe the
60s is the book games people play by
Eric burn so games people play is a book
that's about transactional analysis
transactional analysis is all about
analyzing what's happening under the
surface of every conversation that we're
having so often what we're doing when
we're in a conversation with anyone is
that we're inviting them into some
premise so the premise of your
relationships might be something like
when you and I are together we don't
take accountability for our role in
things we blame other people we vent
about our partners we vent about work
and we pump each other up and tell each
other this is not a you problem this is
an everyone else problem so
externalizing might be a game that you
are playing underneath the surface of
your conversations with a friend and you
might play that game over and over and
over in different contexts and with
different content or you might be
playing the game feelings don't matter
everyone is irrational except for us who
see things clearly all of the time this
might be the implicit unconscious
contract that you have inside of that
relationship and usually when we are
following the rules of these unconscious
games that we've created inside of our
relationships everyone feels safe
because they know what to expect and
what types of interactions are most
likely to get their bids for connection
met and what we're doing when we start
growing or changing the way that we
operate inside of relationships or even
the way that we operate internally is
that we're starting to want to change
the rules of those unconscious games and
the best way to do this in a way way
that does not cause stress and panic for
everyone involved is to first and
foremost sit down and really think to
yourself about what type of games are
running under the surface of your
interactions with a given person and I
do recommend reading this book just for
inspiration around what types of games
are available because there's just so
many different flavors and so many
different types but the idea here is
that you want to make conscious for
yourself what are the rules that we have
established inside of this relationship
and which rules would I like to start
breaking which games do I no longer want
to play step two in this process is you
have a conversation with the other
person where you make explicit which
rules you would like to break so at this
point what we're doing is taking a
proactive approach to containing the
relational change for the other person
and it doesn't hurt to note that this
can actually be very threatening for
another person because they might see
you wanting to engage in a different way
that maybe they aren't comfortable with
yet as a threat to their connection with
you and so I find what helps when we go
about these conversations is to use ey
language as much as possible so instead
of hey let's make all of these changes
just chatting with them about the
changes that you want to make so hey I
know that you're really used to me
brushing everything off and treating
everything as a giant joke but something
I've really been noticing is that that's
made me really struggle with my personal
relationships cuz I haven't been taking
things seriously and so I keep ending up
in these same types of loops and
patterns that don't feel healthy to me
so even though I still love joking with
you and I still love our relationship
I'm wondering if you're willing to kind
of be patient with me and make a little
bit more room for me to start exploring
my relationships in a more serious way
and you can give them the option to
think about that and see whether it
feels right for them or not and
something that's going to be really
important here is making sure that you
are not talking smack about the way that
the two of you used to relate which can
be really tempting when we're at a
certain point in the change process
because as soon as we start doing things
in a different way the ego is naturally
going to want to feel contempt for the
way that we used to do things because it
wants to make it really clear to us
inside of our own minds that that way is
bad discarded and this way is better we
need to try this on but if you have
contempt for the way that you used to
approach things even if it was only a
couple of weeks ago and you're going
into a conversation with someone where
you're trying to show them the new way
that you'd like to do things they're
likely going to feel kind of put down or
threatened if you're talking about the
version of you that they're used to
being connected to as very immature or
pathetic or unable to deal with anything
even though you might need to think of
yourself that way secretly inside of
your own mind for a little bit it's
probably best to just make it clear to
the other person I'm doing this because
I want a certain result that is
different from what I've had in the past
but that doesn't mean you have to go
into this long tie raade about how in
the past you did things in a stupid
emotionally immature way that's going to
get their defenses up and it's just
going to make it a more difficult
conversation to navigate so we're going
to try to frame this as positively and
as neutrally as possible so once again
just trying to assume good faith here
can go a really long way we might be
going going into these interactions
imagining that the other person is just
going to reject us and think that what
we're saying is stupid and if we go in
with that idea we're going to go in with
really defensive energy but if we go in
imagining that this other person might
be very open to this and that they might
actually be excited to grow in that
direction with us we're probably going
to have a much easier time navigating
that conversation something that I've
really learned is that relationships are
incredibly powerful tools when when one
person starts showing up in a way that
is different often even if there's
initial resistance from other people or
they need to take some steps back for a
while there can be something very
contagious about watching someone you're
close to and identify with quite a bit
making a positive change but it's
probably not going to happen instantly
so we have to make room for there to be
some interpersonal growing pains in this
process and we're going to talk about
that after we talk about step three
which is finding new connection points
inside of your relationship with this
person so this is the art of finding new
games to play with the people in your
life if you used to play the game of
pretend everything's fine don't make a
fuss and don't talk about any of your
real feelings think about how you can
propose a game that you would like to
play more and how you can invite the
other person into that game in a way
that feels comfortable for them them
based on where they are in their Journey
so not expecting them to have done all
of the same work that you've done or to
be in the exact same place as you are
but to try to find ways to meet them
where they're at and start moving more
in the direction of the type of
connection that feels more authentic to
you based on the ways that you're
growing so thinking about how do I start
inviting this person into more
self-responsible conversations where
instead of externalizing everything I
lead by example and I start talking
about how I want to show up differently
for myself and inside of relationships
and just see how they're willing to
respond to that or introducing in small
ways more emotional intimacy or more
bids for authentic conversations and
just see what happens as a result and so
this is an ongoing process of trying to
find new ways to keep in connection with
someone that are different from the ones
we've had in the past maybe the way you
relate to each each other emotionally is
going to feel kind of weird for a while
but there's a new hobby you can pick up
together or there's some activity you
can start doing together that still
keeps you in each other's lives in a
different way while the relationship is
going through those Growing Pains so
this is about you proposing new bids for
connection to the other person if you
are going to be denying the ones that
they are throwing your way because you
no longer want to play those old games
you have to be the one to find new ones
to bat over to them
and see if they're willing to accept
them you might be really surprised at
all of the potential that exists within
your relationship with someone that you
were previously leaving completely
untapped so this can be a really
positive process for both people
involved you might realize how much
you've been underestimating the people
in your life because you've just been
defaulting to these games not knowing
that this other person was willing to
play a whole host of other ones with you
but of course it's not always going to
go that way so we're going to spend a
little bit of time talking about how to
deal with a situation where someone in
your life is really resistant to the
ways that you would like to change your
relationship with them so often when
we're very close to someone when we have
an intimate connection with them our
identity is in some ways kind of wrapped
up in their identity even if it's not a
particularly in meshed relationship to
be attached to someone means that
there's a shared relational Norm an
identity that gets built over time and
in this process where we're wanting to
individuate and we're wanting to grow in
a new way we have to be explicitly clear
with ourselves around what is my stuff
what is my identity what is my ego and
what is the other person's stuff what is
their identity what is their ego and we
have to be as clear as possible with
ourselves about this because it helps us
not take it personally when someone
doesn't want to change with us it
doesn't mean that the change we want to
make is wrong or bad and it also doesn't
mean that them not wanting to change in
that way with us is wrong or bad we are
just a separate individual system from
that person and the changes that might
be working really well for us would
actually be quite disruptive in their
life in a way that would not work as
well for them so we have to be willing
to practice some humility and recognize
that we are not doing something that is
UN at erally better and they are doing
something that is unilaterally worse we
are just doing something that is right
for us and they are doing something that
is right for them and they don't need to
approve of or understand the changes
that we're making in order for the
changes that we're making to be what's
right for us it's very easy when we're
insecurely attached to get really
fixated on what's right and what's wrong
instead of just what's right for me and
what's wrong for me we don't have to be
on the same page with everyone we're
close to which doesn't mean it feels
easy to be on different pages it just
means that it doesn't mean we are
morally wrong if they don't agree with
what we want to change and vice versa
the second thing we want to do is try to
really get in their shoes and empathize
as much as we're able to with why this
change or this new relationship Dynamic
that we're proposing to them might feel
threatening to them so when we have
closeness intimacy with someone what
we're essentially doing is mirroring one
another back to each other so that we
can see ourselves more clearly through
someone else's eyes and anytime the
mirror starts changing that's pretty
dysregulating for the person who didn't
want to do the changing because all of a
sudden this person who they're used to
going to and getting a certain response
from is giving them a different response
and that different response that they're
getting might actually be really hitting
them in in places that it's hard for
them to regulate around because remember
you made the choice if you're on this
journey to start confronting yourself in
new ways this person did not make the
same choice so if you were used to
co-regulating with each other based on a
shared fantasy so a shared way of
looking at the world that isn't entirely
accurate or that is perhaps overly
generous to your views of each other and
yourselves you were definitely doing
that because it was what you both needed
at the time
and it was what was adaptive for both of
you at the time but now if this is no
longer adaptive for you it doesn't hurt
to recognize that if you're going to
start approaching your Intimate
Relationships differently it is going to
disregulated and force a change on that
person who may not have chosen that and
so it's not unlikely that they're going
to need to take a bit of space in order
to deal with that disregulation absorb
the idea of this new Norm that you're
proposing and figure out for themselves
whether that feels right or wrong for
them it's actually a very secure and
healthy thing to be able to kind of
withdraw check in with ourselves about
whether some change that someone else
wants to make inside of a relationship
is right for us or not and then come
back and reconnect with that person once
we have our answer so if you're in this
stage where you're proposing these new
bids for connection or these different
games that you want to play inside of
your relationships and you notice that
certain people
are kind of pulling away or taking a bit
of space it doesn't hurt to just give
that person a lot of Grace which is the
final thing I'm going to encourage us to
take into account if the people in our
lives are showing resistance to the
changes we're making which is be
generous with time and space some people
will need a little bit of time to
disconnect some might need years some
might find that they don't want to stay
in connection with where you're going
and that might be incredibly hurtful
but once again if we're really close to
someone are changing in significant ways
is going to cause a little bit of an
identity disturbance for that person and
that might be something that sets them
off on a whole different Journey that we
know nothing about and that they
actually couldn't figure out when they
were in connection with us or maybe they
just straight up don't want to change
they don't want to acknowledge the ways
that you want to acknowledge your
dynamic they don't want to bat those
bids for connection back to you and
that's also something that we need to be
willing to accept might happen but it
doesn't mean that you are right and that
person is wrong it doesn't mean that you
are good and they are bad or vice versa
all it means is that what is functional
for you at this point in your life is
not functional for that person and so
sometimes we do have to be willing to
let people go but that doesn't have to
be the default option often there are a
lot of different things that we can try
before we reach that point and even if
we do reach that point we might find
that later on in the future when we've
both grown in different ways we do have
the ability in the capacity to reconnect
with that person but the only way we're
ever going to find out which of those
scenarios is possible is if we go into
our relationships with good faith around
the idea that someone might be willing
in small or large ways to grow or change
or adapt the relationship and be willing
to take more creative approaches to
connecting with people in new ways as
always none of these are rules that you
have to follow they are just options
that you can try out if and when you
want to see if your relationships are
able to be a bit more malleable in the
growth process I think that's all I'm
going to say about this topic for today
but as always let me know what your
thoughts feelings perspectives are and
questions that are coming up as you
watch this video feel free to leave any
of the above in the comment section
below as always I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again really
[Music]
soon