hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel today on this channel we
are talking about neediness so what that
means to be needy or to feel needy
particularly inside of a romantic
relationship and what we can do to start
to
I want to say dissolve or circumnavigate
the times when we're feeling
particularly needy and the thing I want
to make clear right away is that yes we
all have interpersonal needs none of us
can Thrive or feel completely okay if we
are living life completely on our own
however we don't have person specific
interpersonal needs Beyond let's say
when we are infants and we do have that
implicit connection with our caregiver
because they are the ones who are
keeping us alive
when we reach adulthood the needs that
we feel the interpersonal needs that we
experience are capable of being
fulfilled in many different forms
however often when we start
co-regulating with a certain person
maybe a friend or a romantic partner it
can start to feel as though we need
things from that person specifically and
that's what I'm going to Define as this
feeling of kind of neediness when we are
feeling desperate to get something out
of someone that they are not necessarily
willing in that moment to give us
so that doesn't mean that this person is
completely unwilling to meet any of our
needs across the board it just means
that the way we're going to Define
neediness today is being in a moment of
feeling desperate for something that we
are not getting from a specific person
so maybe someone hasn't texted you back
within a time frame that you think they
should have or that you would have liked
for them to have texted you back within
you might be feeling needy in the moment
waiting for their message as though you
will not be able to change your
emotional state until they do that
highly specific thing that they're
currently not doing or something similar
in the realm right maybe they call you
maybe they show up at your door but in
any case you feel as though you have a
need for a specific action that is not
being fulfilled by a specific other
person
and today we're going to talk about how
to work with that energy inside of
relationships in the moment that it
comes up and this is very important
neediness like any temporary State
cannot be dealt with once and for all
across the board it needs to be worked
with in each moment that we feel it so
to be less needy in relationships what
you need to do is learn to work with the
feeling of neediness in the moment that
it arises for you over and over and over
again
and eventually over a series of many
instances where you work with this
emotion your overall state will no
longer be particularly needy now before
we talk about exactly how to work with
this in the moment I want to talk about
the
kind of common piece of advice that I
see people giving each other online
about how to be less needy and that
piece of advice is learn to get your
interpersonal needs met by other people
so instead of just focusing on your
partner to fulfill all of your Social
and emotional needs make sure you are
also building out a life where you have
Community Support where you are close
with friends where you are emotionally
intimate with other people and I think
that that is phenomenal advice I think
that if you have the capacity and
ability to do that it is likely to help
you massively with feeling less needy
across the board in particular
relationships
however that isn't the only solution and
it's also not the most achievable
solution for a lot of people in the
short-term future
so if you're someone who currently does
not have an active Community or Social
Circle that you can turn to in the
moments when you're feeling like you
need that co-regulation kind of
Desperately it can feel very
um hopeless it can feel very Out Of
Reach to establish that Circle and so it
might feel easier in the moment to go
well since I don't have that I'm just
going to double down on trying to get my
need met In This Moment by this person
and so what I'm going to suggest here is
that well yes you absolutely should
strive to have an active community of
people you're close with for your own
emotional social well-being it's also
important to learn to be present in the
moments that your needs are not getting
met and work with that feeling of having
an unmet need
I think that if there is anything we
leave out of the discourse around
emotional needs it's the fact that we
are not I'm not going to say supposed to
because that's taking kind of a
moralistic stance on it but we are not
going to have our needs perfectly met
all the time in every moment
so the hack to find your way out of this
game of chronically feeling panicked
when you have a need that's going unmet
is to learn to be present with yourself
and okay in the moments when your needs
are not getting met so normally when we
are feeling needy what's happening is
that we are kind of watching a movie of
the future inside of our own minds right
and we're going I will be okay I will
feel okay and relaxed again in my body
if this sequence of events that I'm
imagining in my head happens exactly the
way that I'm imagining it or maybe with
some slight variations but I will not be
okay unless this thing happens and
that's that feeling of kind of
desperation and neediness that will
often Propel us to take actions that we
wouldn't otherwise take so to become
less needy we need to drop not only our
attachment to that specific sequence of
future events that we're imagining we
also need to drop our attachment to the
feeling that we're trying desperately to
get out of that future sequence of
events and we need to learn to be okay
and present with the feeling that we're
having in the actual moment we're
experiencing this
so if I am thinking ahead about some
sequence of events I want to happen
about some way I want a certain person
to act and I'm telling myself I will
only be okay if I kind of like swim
across this shore of uncertainty and
arrive at that future point where I'm
getting those things the way that I want
them what am I not doing in the present
moment
my head is somewhere completely
different than where I actually am
where I actually am is maybe alone in a
room looking at my phone
and in that moment that I'm sitting
there concocting all of these future
schemes and plans what am I not paying
attention to
where I am
what's going on around me in the moment
what's going on internally for me in the
moment what is my actual body State like
right now
and if my body State happens to be very
upregulated very energized very kind of
frantic and panicked why
if I were to drop that Panic if I were
to down regulate
to associate myself to the moment and to
ask myself what's actually happening
right now
is there some sort of Interstate I'm
worried I would arrive at that I'm very
afraid of
maybe it's a feeling of loneliness maybe
it's a feeling of fear maybe there's
some sort of feeling I'm having that I
fear I cannot contain
so what do I do I dissociate from it by
telling myself a story about the future
and telling myself that I'm going to
feel something else if only I can get X
Y and Z to go and to happen in the way
that I am planning for it to so to put
this extremely plainly in order to be
less needy in relationships you need to
learn to get comfortable with the
feeling of lacking something for a
certain period of time maybe for an
indefinite period of time
so I kind of liken this too when I was
growing up for about 10 years between
like 15 and 25 I was just a chronic
yo-yo Dieter so I was always overeating
for periods then under eating for
periods and I could never really find
balance and then eventually at one point
I was like you know what I'm gonna try
fasting just kind of as a psychological
experiment to see what it's like for me
to learn to cope with the feeling of
hunger without panicking
so I did a three-day fast to start and
that was
um definitely an experience but after
that point for a period of about a year
once a week I would pick a day to do a
full day fast so anywhere between 24 and
36 hours
and the purpose of that fast was not to
lose weight it was not to do anything
diet related it was solely to get myself
accustomed in my body to getting used to
the feeling of hunger not needing to be
immediately acted upon so in the past
when I would feel hunger I would panic
and after about a year of intermittent
fasting I learned okay hunger does not
need to equal Panic a lot of times I
felt hungry and I have still been alive
the next day even if I didn't eat for 18
more hours after that feeling of hunger
came up
and the same tool can be applied really
well to interpersonal relationships so
what I'm going to ask you to do or
invite you to do in this video is to
start getting comfortable with the
feeling of interpersonal hunger so that
means not panicking the moment you feel
lonely the moment you feel ashamed the
moment you feel like you really want
some validation or connection
it's only a feeling that you're panicked
about because you never learned to
tolerate it so when you were very young
especially if you air anxiously attached
what that means is that you learned to
heighten your own awareness of negative
body States because in order to get your
caregivers attention consistently you
sometimes had to really State your case
so maybe you had a parent who was very
busy who had a couple of children who
were older than you and so you needed to
cry a little bit longer or louder than
the average baby to get your caregiver
to pay attention to you and so when that
is your formula for getting your needs
met what your brain will naturally start
to do is make you hyper aware of your
needs the second you start to feel them
because it knows okay I'm gonna have to
really State my case here
and that becomes an ingrained pattern of
thinking as you grow up so your brain
will naturally start to focus or in some
cases even fixate on your needs when
they arrive and you're going to have
this very automatic instinct to become a
bit panicked and try as hard as you
possibly can to get your needs met the
second you feel them
but the brilliant part of being an adult
is that we have the chance to rewrite
the way that we think about all of this
so you now have the option to train your
brain to learn the way a secure person
naturally tends to know that your needs
do not need to get met in the exact
moment you feel them
this goes for most needs unless you are
currently like bleeding out and really
require medical attention there is a
very strong chance that the need you
want to get fulfilled actually can wait
a little bit and if the options are
wreaking havoc on your relationships by
consistently demanding that other people
meet your needs in the moment you feel
them because you don't know how to calm
down otherwise or learning to go a
little bit hungry and learning to
tolerate the feeling of emotional hunger
first in one moment then in the next
moment and then in the next until it
becomes a pattern and until you start to
feel confident and comfortable with that
feeling of emotional hunger when it
shows up until you learn to do that it's
going to feel pretty difficult to
navigate interpersonal relationships
without feeling like you are chronically
kind of demanding more than the other
person is willing to give because let me
tell you what a secure relationship is
not
a secure relationship is not two people
constantly meeting each other's needs
okay
a secure relationship is two people
meeting their own needs finding some
explicit agreements about which needs
they're going to meet for each other and
giving each other leeway and Grace in
the moments when those needs are not
able to get met
you will not ever find a relationship no
matter how harmonious beautiful secure
interconnected where the other person is
able to meet your needs a hundred
percent of the time
but if you want to have a secure
relationship you do need to learn how to
cope with the times when they aren't
able to do that for you
including the times when you don't have
community members family members other
people immediately available to help
meet those needs for you so we're going
to talk a little bit about what it looks
like to develop that skill and how you
can start to grow that muscle of
emotional tolerance and the Beautiful
part of this is that the more you're
able to be present with yourself and
kind of tolerate that emotional hunger
the less likely you are to reach for the
closest food that's available to you
even if it's poisonous right
so when we learn to be comfortable
feeling a little bit dissatisfied in
some ways and we teach ourselves to know
that we're going to be okay if we don't
have that need fulfilled for a little
bit what that means is that we're able
to hold out until we find a healthy
means of getting that need fulfilled
it's kind of like if it's 4 P.M and I'm
really hungry but all I have on me is a
chocolate bar if I think I have to
satisfy my Hunger the second I feel it
or else I'm gonna die then I'm
definitely going to eat that chocolate
bar
but if I know for a fact that in two
hours I'm going to be home and I'm going
to be able to cook a healthy meal for
myself and I'm going to be able to
tolerate the feeling of being a little
bit hungry until then now I'm developing
a pattern of being able to make
healthier choices for myself and the
same is true when we're able to tolerate
emotional hunger for longer periods of
time so the first step in this process
is just making a commitment to ourselves
to be present with ourselves insofar as
we're able to in the moments where we
feel a bit panicked and needy so when we
are watching that story in our head of
the future and some action that we feel
like we need someone else to take or
else we will not feel okay take a moment
associate yourself and go okay what's
actually going on in this moment
where am I
what do I hear what do I see what do I
taste what do I smell
and what's going on in my body am I kind
of shaking is my heart racing and a lot
of the time all that we're really afraid
of is the internal feeling state in our
bodies
right
so sometimes when we're feeling
something that we did not learn to
contain in a healthy way when we're
young whether that is anger whether that
is sadness and grief whether that is joy
and excitement and anticipation
anytime we feel a feeling that we at a
young age didn't learn kind of where the
boundaries around it were it's possible
that we implicitly automatically start
looking towards other people to find and
Define those boundaries for us by kind
of putting our emotion on them and then
hoping that they're going to be able to
find and Define the edges around that
emotion and hand it back to us
and in those moments it's really
important to just notice
like hey I'm feeling this thing that
feels really big and really huge in my
body and I actually don't really know
how to handle that
but in this moment I am handling it
in this moment I can sit here and I can
feel the intensity of all of that energy
in my body and look I'm surviving
still surviving
maybe the emotion's even starting to
change a little bit
as I sit here and stay present with it
and for a lot of people this can be kind
of a revolution in your own self-concept
is realizing that all you're really
afraid of
is feeling and being present with
certain States in your body that you're
usually quick to dissociate from
and a lot of the time those feelings are
not as scary as we think they are
especially now that we're adults who
have the ability to handle our own
emotions in ways that maybe we didn't
when we were little kids so in these
types of moments first try to name the
feeling
maybe the feeling's not what you thought
maybe you thought it was excitement but
actually it's shame that's present for
you
maybe the reason you are so thrilled at
the thought of this person texting you
back is because originally the feeling
that came up in your body was some
feeling of shame or self-disgust from
something else that happened recently
and to try to get away from that feeling
your mind invented a story about what
you need someone else to do
but actually what if you just name that
I feel shame right now
I feel disgust
and just notice what that feels like in
your body it doesn't mean it's the truth
about who you are
it just means it's what's coming up for
you physiologically in this moment and
what you might want to do if this is a
feeling that you usually don't have a
way to contain that maybe as a child you
didn't learn how to work your way out of
without help
try to think of something you could do
an hour from now 10 minutes from now if
you can that you know will change your
state in some way
so whether that means going for a run
around the block whether it means
arranging something to do in the evening
with a friend whether it means allowing
yourself to take a nap or whatever it is
that you know will help you shift out of
this emotional state in the future that
might help you be more present with it
without panicking
and I want to be clear that this is a
skill so learning to be present with
difficult emotions can be
extraordinarily difficult especially if
you have some sort of trauma response or
early wounding that has caused you to
develop an ingrained pattern of
dissociating from a particular feeling
so don't beat yourself up if this takes
time and practice and patience it would
be bizarre if it didn't but over time
with repeated practice you're going to
get better and better at tolerating
these states when they come up and
becoming aware of which types of
emotions tend to trigger that needy
externalizing response in you
so now you're able to not only tolerate
the moments when they come up but design
your life more effectively so that those
types of moments happen less and less
for you so the second tip I'm going to
give about this is one that's a bit more
immediate so if you're really freaking
out really panicking can't seem to get
yourself settled in that state ask
yourself the question
how would I fulfill this need or fix the
way that I'm feeling
if I lived in a world in which this
other person who I'm kind of desperate
to do something specific for me did not
exist
so what if a year ago that person had
dropped dead
what Would You Do In This Moment
what would you reach to for
self-regulation which friends might you
call What activity might you do if you
did not at all have the option to try to
get your needs met through this other
person what would you do and what that
does is it shifts your body into that
kind of hyper-focused panicked mode into
a more creative headspace
because now you're accessing a different
part of your brain right now you're
generating ideas now you're speculating
now you're probably shifting into a more
kind of open Creative Energy which is
the opposite of that narrow fixated
energy so even just playing with that as
a thought experiment for five or ten
minutes can go a very long way in those
moments when you're feeling very
panicked and if you want to take it to
the next level go do that thing go do
whatever it is that you would do if you
lived in a world in which this other
person was dead had never been born or
was in jail or in some other way just
completely and totally had no means
whatsoever to respond to your need
and as much as you can try out whether
you can do that thing first tip number
three and this is something that you're
going to want to work with over and over
again as you move through any given
relationship
when you're experiencing a feeling of
neediness I need this person to do
something or else I'm not going to feel
okay
ask yourself did this person explicitly
agree to meeting this need for me
and in order to answer that question
accurately you're gonna have to get
really brutally honest with yourself
about what the actual need is
there is no part of your brain there is
nowhere in Maslow's hierarchy that has a
need for someone to text you or a need
for someone to tell you they like the
way you look right there's always
something deeper underlying that maybe
it's a need for love and connection but
my guess is that most often when we're
feeling really needy in the way that we
defined it earlier in this video what
we're wanting is a feeling of validation
and a feeling of I'm okay
because somebody else tells me that I am
when we enter into Partnerships most of
us do not on a first date look at
someone and go I want you to make me
feel in every moment that I don't feel
okay like I am okay if we did say that
we wouldn't get a second date because
that would be way too huge of an ask
right that's asking someone to put us as
their number one first priority above
absolutely everything and that is not a
healthy relationship that is a
codependent relationship so what we want
to do is ask ourselves did my partner
agree to meet this need 100 of the time
explicitly did they say to my face I
will always drop everything to attend to
every feeling that you have in a given
moment if no but I'm panicking and
feeling like I want them to fulfill this
need am I willing to ask directly am I
willing to tell them hey I really need
you to drop everything 100 of the time
when I'm feeling a negative emotion and
help me fix that feeling
and if we would not ask that out of a
partner if we think that that sounds
ridiculous or like we would sound crazy
if we ask someone that it's possible we
have to acknowledge that we are putting
too many of our needs into a given
relationship a really big point of
contention I see particularly in a lot
of anxious avoidant pairings is that one
person comes into the relationship
wanting to give and receive a lot of
emotional support but they've chosen a
partner who really struggles to feel in
touch with their own emotions and to
understand how to feel in touch with
other people's so now you have this
total mismatch of what two people are
able or willing to offer each other but
both have expectations that are not
getting fulfilled and in those cases the
only real solution besides breaking up
is getting really explicit and specific
about what each of you are looking for
out of the relationship and asking the
other are you willing to do that for me
and if so how often ish and what are the
exceptions and so if you have that
conversation and you find that what
they're willing to offer is like 25 of
what you need then you have a couple of
options right you can say okay that's
fine I'm going to take that 25 percent
and then I'm going to find a way to get
the other 75 percent of my needs in that
area met in other ways or I'm going to
learn how to tolerate not having that
need met long term or you can negotiate
a little bit but the point of the matter
is the war strategy you could possibly
employ is just decide in your own mind
which needs you want your partner to
fulfill without ever asking them and
then get really panicked and try to
manipulate the situation every time you
find one of the those needs is getting
unmet for you so this requires a little
bit of a review of what your own needs
feelings wants priorities are and
checking in with yourself about whether
or not you are choosing relationships
that are able to live up to that or
whether you are kind of shooting
yourself in the foot by choosing
Partners who are uninterested unwilling
or incapable of fulfilling the needs
that you want to have fulfilled step
four this one's a little bit more
um
specific esoteric uh but I really like
it and I try to use this quite a bit
when I notice myself feeling needy
sometimes we get in a pattern of people
meeting the particular needs that we
have in particular scenarios
and then the moment they can't meet
those needs or they're unwilling to or
they're just wanting some alone time
that day we get really upset because we
feel like okay I've come to rely on you
for getting this need met and now I feel
like you owe it to me right but again
unless there was an explicit agreement
made and a lot of the time even if there
was people have off days where they're
not able to attend to us in the ways
that we want them to and to love someone
we need to be able to acknowledge and
make room for that so what we need to do
is to learn to not let the things that
we appreciate about a relationship
become an expectation if it's not again
an explicit agreement
so I'll give you kind of an example of
this there was a period earlier this
year where myself and my roommate who is
also my closest oldest friend were both
um unemployed at the same time so she
was off work for a while I just finished
a degree and wanted to kind of take a
couple months and just decompress not do
a whole lot and so we ended up spending
a ton of time together and it was joyous
like this is one of my favorite people
in the world we had never had so much
time that we got to spend together
freely and so I felt really happy really
at peace like we developed a really
strong capacity for co-regulation with
each other and then she got a job and
went back to work full time
and the first day she went back to work
full-time I was like that's cool I have
so much alone time now the second day I
was like oh I'm kind of starting to miss
my friend and the third day I was like
damn I resent her for having a job I
want her to come home and continue to
meet my needs for connection and for
laughter and for co-regulation because
I've gotten used to that so what I could
have done is gone hey I need you to now
spend x amount of time with me once
you're done work every night so that my
needs can continue to get met I need you
to check in with me during the day I
could have tried to force the old
formula of this person being the person
I go to with pretty much all of my
co-regulation needs onto the new
scenario which would not have been a
particularly Fair way to approach it so
instead what I had to do was go hey that
was a wonderful two months we had that
was so phenomenal when the circumstances
lined up in such a way that we were able
to be totally present with each other
other to spend so much time together to
meet so many of our interpersonal needs
through each other and now things have
changed so I'm going to learn to
appreciate what was in order to drop
that as an expectation for the future
when we can look at the past and go that
was an incredible period of time that
was an incredible circumstance that was
an incredible six months of things
feeling easy and effortless and fun with
a new romantic partner or whatever it is
I'm going to be grateful for that and
I'm going to not expect the future to
match the past
then we can actually show up in the
moment that we're in and go okay what's
the situation now
maybe something shifted maybe this
person used to have more time and now
they don't maybe they feel differently
than they did
where can we go with the truth of this
moment and then the truth of the next
moment where can we go in each moment if
we Orient ourselves to the present
instead of trying to force the past onto
the present and the future so it sounds
kind of weird and counter-intuitive but
in order to let the past go we often
have to appreciate just how grateful we
are to have had it
and only when we're able to do that and
go wow that was incredible that was
extraordinary I so appreciated the
experiences that I had with this person
but the exact way things were is over
so now it's a beautiful memory I have
and allowing it to take that new form is
a beautiful memory allows me to look at
the present moment and go okay what's
here what do I have left and how do I
want to work with that to build the best
possible most cohesive and most
Cooperative present that I can with this
other person the moment I accepted okay
this friend can't meet all my
co-regulation needs anymore I started
intentionally picking up some new
activities and investing more and more
in friendships that I was developing on
the periphery of my Social Circle and
now those things are like the best part
of my life and none of that would have
happened none of those new connections
would have grown and flourished if I had
stayed stuck on the past and the way
that things used to be instead of
accepting where I was and going I'm
going to grow the seeds of my life
wherever I happen to be planted in this
moment and tip number five for becoming
less needy in romantic relationships
and I don't want to sound sarcastic when
I say this I really mean it and it does
really get lost as much as it's a cliche
you need to learn to find a way to like
yourself if you want to feel less needy
in romantic relationships in a
relationship of any kind there's three
kind of entities right there's the self
there's the other and there is the we so
what happens when the two of you come
together and the relationship that you
form
when you like yourself if you are in
conflict with another person or if
there's a rupture in your relationship
with another person
you get disconnected from the other and
temporarily maybe the kind of bottom
falls out from that construct of we the
world that you've created together is
for a period of time inaccessible or not
something that you're able to draw from
in the way that you normally do
but if you like yourself you still have
that concept of the eye and the I and
the truth of your experience can be that
you feel really sad or that you really
wish you had that relationship back
but it's not this feeling of kind of
panic because you don't know who you are
or how to orient yourself in reality
without that relationship
right when you don't like yourself and
you have a rupture in one of your
relationships that you're getting a lot
of your self-esteem needs met through
what happens is not just that there's a
disconnect from the other and a
disconnect from the we there's also a
disconnect from the eye from the way
that you see yourself as a person which
adds a humongous pressure to repair
things maybe before the relationship is
actually ready for that repair
right a lot of the time relationships
and other people need space to kind of
breathe and air things out and return to
the situation when both people are ready
to work through it from a grounded place
but if you will not feel grounded until
and unless your relationship is repaired
now that feeling of absolute desperation
and neediness is going to come online
and so this is a long-term solution but
what I'm essentially saying here is if
you don't want to feel needy anymore if
you don't want to feel desperate when
something goes wrong in your
relationship which is different than
feeling sad right
sadness is a kind of like grounded
present feeling desperation is a feeling
of being disconnected from the cell and
panicking about what's going to happen
in the future you need to find a way to
be okay with yourself as a person in the
moments that you're feeling things you
don't want to feel
so learning to be present with shame
without telling yourself I am a shameful
person
right feeling self-disgust feeling shame
that comes up for everybody it happens
there is nobody who never feels those
things but part of being secure is
learning I can feel shame without hating
who I am as a person and kicking myself
off my own team I can feel sad without
needing to rush to immediately fix it I
can judge myself or dislike myself in
some ways without needing another
person's approval in order to get myself
back on my own team
sometimes it just means I need to make
changes in the way that I'm living my
life and showing up for myself that
allow me to like myself more
consistently so long term what we need
to do is find a way to make our
self-esteem rest on something that is a
lot sturdier than someone else's
connection to us
so that in those moments when we're
feeling disconnected which is never a
pleasant feeling for anyone right when
there's a relationship that usually
feels very warm very connected very
reliable and there's a rupture it's not
going to feel good but it's not going to
feel like we are being disconnected from
ourselves as well as the other person
and so to summarize with all of this
what I want to make clear is that that
feeling of neediness of I absolutely
have to get something specific to happen
or else I will not be okay to change we
have to get comfortable being present
with ourselves in the moments that we
feel needy
and noticing that nothing terrible is
happening as a result of us feeling a
little bit panicked
nothing terrible is happening even
though we feel angry
even though we feel lonely
even though we feel shame
we are okay we are adults who are now
capable of learning to contain our own
emotional experiences without needing
something specific to happen to shift
them
right the opposite of neediness is not
having our needs fulfilled it's just
being present with whatever is happening
in a given moment all right that's all I
have to say on this topic for today as
always if you guys have any questions or
anything that's coming up for you as you
watch this video I would love to hear
about them please leave your comments
below I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and your inner children and that you are
not abandoning those inner children in
your moments of panic and I will see you
back here again super soon
thank you