hey guys heidi preeb here for the past
couple of months on this channel we've
been talking a lot about how to identify
your own attachment style so by this
point if you've been following along you
probably have a decent idea of what
category you fall into whether it's
secure avoidant fearful avoidant or
anxious and you might have an idea of
where your partner falls on that scale
as well so in this video what i wanted
to do was start giving us some hands-on
concrete tools for navigating difficult
parts of relationships based on
attachment theory because in my opinion
that is what we should always be using
attachment theory for right it's not
about just identifying ourselves and
analyzing ourselves it's about making
our lives and our relationships better
and when we become aware of the way that
other people operate that's different
from the way that we operate it gets a
lot easier to communicate with each
other and to resolve difficult issues so
a lot of the time when you have two
insecurely attached people in one
relationship there are a lot of triggers
that go off around conflict and what
ends up happening is that you end up
kind of arguing around the issue rather
than actually dealing with the core
problem so you can have an argument that
lasts for three hours three weeks three
years and never actually get down to the
heart of what the difference of opinion
is or what the different needs are so
what i want you guys to use these videos
to do is to clear as much of that
clutter as possible away from the
conversation so that you can get down to
the heart of what actually matters now i
want to note that a lot of the tactics
that i'm going to suggest in this video
are secure tactics so what that means is
that they are going to come most easily
to people who have both a strong ability
to self-regulate intense situations and
who also have a very high threshold for
listening and staying present with the
emotional experiences of others and
responding emotionally and
empathetically to them so if you are not
securely attached these tools might take
a lot of work on your behalf they might
take some honing and some refining and
there might be a lot of trigger
management that you have to do with
yourself and your own attachment system
to get to the place where these tools
come more naturally and that's totally
okay so as we walk through this video
try to put yourself in the situation
right so think would i be able to
respond in this way if my anxiously
attached partner came to me with x y or
z issue and anytime you feel like you're
getting kind of either activated or
feeling like you would want to shut down
in that situation just notice that
because that's where the work needs to
be done on your behalf right so again
this isn't about winning the conflict
and it's also not about just folding and
giving your partner everything they want
at the expense of what you want it's
about making sure that you are working
with the actual issues at hand and not
getting distracted from the issue or
thrown completely off course or starting
an entirely new fight because triggers
are going off left right and center and
you can't stay on track so the number
one thing that you need to keep in mind
if you are in conflict with an anxiously
attached person is that they are going
to have a very large fear of abandonment
that is very present and very on the
surface for them and if you are able to
have the conflict in such a way that
they don't fear getting abandoned
throughout the course of the conflict it
is going to go about a thousand times
more smoothly now can you control how
someone else feels of course not but
what we're going to talk about is
certain things you can say and do that
might be able to soothe that fear of
abandonment as you move through the
conflict so that they're not as
activated during the conflict and both
of you are able to actually stay present
and say what you need to say so step
number one in having a conflict with an
anxiously attached person is name the
conflict for what it is and set a
statement of intent a lot of the time
when you go into conflict with an
anxiously attached person they
immediately will start to feel like is
this the relationship ending am i being
abandoned what's happening here it can
feel very unsettling so if you make it
clear right from the get-go hey i want
us to have a conversation about this or
hey i've noticed that things are getting
kind of heated i want us to be able to
stop for a moment and just look at what
we're dealing with here here's the
problem that i see us getting into i
want to be able to resolve this with you
because our relationship really matters
to me or because you're someone who i
really respect and what you're feeling
and thinking matters to me so phrases
that work really well i'm not going
anywhere i'm not trying to abandon you i
want to reassure you that i'm going to
be here to work this through but i might
need to have some ground rules around
how we have this conversation which
leads us to point number two which is
set very clear boundaries and stick to
them so step one is all about making
things non-ambiguous so that you both
understand what page you're on but step
two is about being aware of and managing
your own conflict triggers right so this
is gonna look very different depending
on what your attachment style is if
you're avoidant you might get really
triggered if let's say you're getting
blamed for something you're being told
what to do if you're fearful avoidant
you might also have a fear of
abandonment on the surface or you might
have the avoidant fear of engulfment
present for you so before going into a
conflict so a great time to do this
would be right now as soon as you finish
watching this video you're going to want
to sit down and think about what tends
to come up for me in high conflict
situations particularly with the
anxiously attached person in my life so
where do i want to shut down where do i
want to lash out and figure out what
those trigger points are for you and at
this point in the conversation you want
to set some boundaries around them so
you can let them know i might get really
upset if i feel like i'm being blamed
for something and it might be hard for
me to continue the conversation in good
faith in that situation i might need to
take a walk cool down and come back to
the conversation in a couple of hours or
i might need some time to think i might
need to take some space for 24 hours and
then come back to the conversation once
i've had some time to root through my
own thoughts so you need to be very
clear going in on what your triggers are
what helps you calm down or return to
equilibrium once that trigger goes off
and you need to be able to communicate
your boundary around it so what you will
do if that trigger goes off for you in
order to allow you to move through the
conversation in a way that doesn't make
it worse right so there's like a year of
my own life where i would have this very
intense trigger around getting blamed
for something and if i felt like i was
being blamed for something that was
unfair there was absolutely no hope of
the conversation going into a better
place from there right so i learned as
soon as that trigger comes up for me i
need to disengage take an hour take 24
hours whatever it is let my partner know
i'll be back and back online and ready
to talk about this again at a designated
point in time right but for now i know
i'm only going to get more triggered and
this conversation is going to go to a
worse and worse place if i keep engaging
and sometimes that's all you can do
right and the more that you do
attachment work and attachment healing
the more present you're able to stay
even when those triggers go off so in a
year or so you may no longer need to
take that space but be really realistic
with yourself about what your triggers
are when they come up for you and what
you need in that situation and the
reason this is important is because if a
trigger comes up for you and you know
you need to disengage all of a sudden
but you haven't made it clear at the
beginning of the conversation that that
might happen the anxiously attached
person doesn't understand what's going
on and they might feel like oh my god
they're shutting down they're taking
space they're storming out maybe does
that mean that they're leaving me does
that mean they're never gonna call me
again does that mean i'm being abandoned
and when that fear of abandonment is
triggered the anxiously attached
person's impulse is to kind of up the
ante and try to get closer and closer
and that's going to trigger you further
and further right so it really helps
everyone from the get-go if you're aware
of what your triggers are you lay down
your boundaries around them and you let
them know i want to see this conflict
through to the end but if x y or z
happens i might need to put it on hold
for a period of time so that i can come
back to it in a more productive way it's
kind of like and i don't know if this is
a great example because it's not like
our partners are our children but when
we're triggered regardless of our
attachment styles we are all kind of
children like we're operating from these
very childlike places in ourselves it's
kind of like if you have a child who
really wants a snack they're really
hungry but for whatever reason you have
to hold off for a little bit maybe you
don't have any on you whatever it is if
you just tell them not right now not
right now not right now they're gonna
start freaking out because they don't
know when they're getting their need met
right but if you tell them in 45 minutes
we're going to be home and i can make
you a snack that allows them to calm
down because they know what's going to
happen and they can plan for it so
predictability has returned to their
world view right and that's the same
thing that we do when we let our
partners know i'm triggered here's the
period of time that i'm requesting to
take and we will return to this conflict
after that period of time it allows the
nervous system to relax because they
know that their need is going to get met
it's just a matter of when not if so
step three and this is the most
important one if you have an anxiously
attached partner is really focus on the
emotion that's present in the
conversation don't try to immediately
address the logic and definitely don't
try to dispute their logic before you
have acknowledged their emotion and so
this is the biggest difference
particularly between the avoidant and
the anxious type is that the anxious
type relies on distorted emotion so when
they feel something they kind of fit the
logic around it versus the avoidant
relies on distorted logic so when they
think something makes sense they try to
fit the way that they feel around it so
often when you have a more avoidant
leaning partner and a more anxious
leaning partner the anxious person will
present with a lot of emotion and the
avoidant person might go wait a minute
the logic doesn't quite make sense there
let me help you sort out the logic and
then your feelings will change but for
the anxiously attached person that's not
the way that it works so you have to
understand that they have a different
way of processing both emotion and logic
so if you're able to kind of step into
their worldview temporarily and
understand how they're coming to the
conclusions that they're coming to which
requires taking their emotional state
into account conflict is going to go a
lot more smoothly okay so i'm going to
give an example of what this looks like
so very early on in life anxiously
attached children learned that their
emotions were a pretty good predictor of
what was going on in their environment
so if they felt stressed out it was
probably because there was a lot of
stress around them if they felt sad it
was probably because no one was
attending to them so they learned in
their mind to kind of pair their
emotional state with what was going on
outside of them and so in the mind of
the adult anxiously attached individual
this is still kind of how the world
operates they figure if i feel really
stressed out if i feel really negative
if i feel really happy it must be
because something in my environment is
causing me to feel stressed out or happy
or whatever it is and a lot of the time
this is right right they have a natural
awareness of the fact that yes the world
around us impacts the way that we feel
but they don't always know that certain
emotional states can actually arise from
inside based on triggers from our
environment so this can get us into
dicey situations because the anxiously
attached person can learn if i'm feeling
a certain way it must be because
something is going on in my environment
that is causing me to feel that way and
they can make false attributions and i
think that a lot of conflict ends up
happening between anxiously attached
people and avoidantly attached people in
particular when the anxiously attached
person makes a false attribution so an
example of this might be let's say they
wake up one morning and they check
social media and they see a really
unflattering picture of themselves that
someone else has posted and now there's
this feeling of insecurity really
present in their psyche and as they go
through their day they aren't
necessarily aware on a conscious level
that that's what's happening and that
they're kind of filtering the entire
world that day through the lens of
feeling insecure
now let's say they go on social media
again later that day and they see that
you have liked the photo of someone who
is let's say a friend of yours who is of
the gender or sex that you're attracted
to now that feeling of insecurity that's
been super present and on the surface
for them all day might suddenly get
paired in their mind with the fact that
you like that photo so on a normal day
where they weren't feeling triggered
maybe that would annoy them a little bit
but they'd kind of let it go but today
because this unconscious trigger has
kind of been operating just under the
surface of their awareness all day now
the second they have something in
reality to attach it to it feels like of
course that's it i feel super insecure
because my partner liked this photo
right and now they might approach you
kind of guns blazing going i knew it i
know you're attracted to that person
i've known this whole time you're gonna
leave me for them you're gonna have an
affair and this might to you feel like
it's coming out of absolutely nowhere
because maybe you were just liking that
photo to be nice or because you like the
caption or whatever it is and so your
instinct might be either to defend
yourself or to shut down disengage and
go i'm not dealing with that at all
because in your mind you might be
thinking well i'm not attracted to that
friend i didn't like that photo because
we're having an affair the logic of this
does not check out so i'm not going to
engage with this poor logic or you might
try to argue the logic right but you
need to keep in mind that for the
anxiously attached person they believe
that because they feel so strongly it
must be because something's going on
right there's no way they would be
feeling that strongly if it weren't for
a really painful thing that were truly
happening in their environment so maybe
their logic is wrong and you can
recognize that but their feeling is real
and probably the feeling that they're
feeling is very old they may have felt
insecure their entire lives about the
way they look or the way that they show
up in the world in some way and if
you're telling them what you're saying
makes no sense what you might be trying
to communicate is that you are incorrect
about what you believe that i am
perceiving but what they're gonna hear
is your feeling is not real and the
feeling that they're feeling is very
real right their nervous system is on
fire at this point so because they've
paired their emotion and the action that
you've taken they now think that if you
deny the action you're denying their
emotion so the way to kind of
circumnavigate this without it flying
off course and getting worse is to
acknowledge their feeling
without agreeing to the logic
okay and this is a massive hack massive
massive hack for arguing with people who
have an anxious attachment style because
what they really want is to have their
pain seen
the logic behind it is actually not as
important to them it might be what
you're focusing on the most heavily but
to them that's the least important part
what they want is to be seen in their
pain and to know that they're not going
to be abandoned so there are a few ways
that you can approach this one might be
to speak about the situation
hypothetically and acknowledge their
pain around it so for example saying i
hear that you are worried i'm attracted
to that friend and that i'm having an
affair with them of course you would be
really upset if you thought that i would
be gutted if i thought that you were
having an affair i would be furious i
would be really stressed out
but that's actually not what's happening
at all i really care about you i really
care about our relationship and i really
want to stay with you i'm not trying to
leave you for anyone else right most of
that sentence was emotion based only a
small part of it was acknowledging
what's actually happening but what's
important is that you validate the way
that they're feeling because what they
think you're saying if you just argue
the logic is i'm having an affair and
you're crazy for being upset about it
right but if you're able to say yes if
that were happening it makes sense that
you would be upset about it now they
feel like their pain is being seen and
that it's validated right but notice
that you're not agreeing to the
reasoning itself right you're able to
parse those two things apart a little
bit for them in a way that they're not
able to in their own mind when they're
triggered and what you want to do at
this phase as much as possible is really
figure out what is the pain what is the
fear that's at the root of this right
they might come to you with all of this
convoluted logic about how they think
you're cheating on them or whatever it
is but at the base of that there's
something else maybe there's something
they feel insecure about within your
relationship and i guarantee you that if
that feeling that's at the core changes
for them through the course of your
conversation even if it's only being
temporarily soothed it will get you on a
much better track much better so this
step is literally just about dropping
everything and focusing on the emotion
sometimes it can help just to directly
mirror them so if they're coming to you
saying hey i'm so angry about this hey
okay i hear that you're feeling super
angry about this what else can you tell
me well i just think that you don't love
me and you've always had a thing for her
okay i'm hearing you say that you have
doubts about how much i love you and
that you're afraid that i have feelings
for someone else that would be really
painful to feel what else
and as soon as they can see that you are
calm you are regulated and you're
listening to them and you're absorbing
what they're saying you don't have to
agree with them all you have to do at
certain points is mirror back to them
what they're saying so they know that
their pain is being acknowledged if you
can do that enough times that you
eventually get down to the root of
what's upsetting them and what the real
insecurity is and you work with that now
you're dealing with the real issue
right
but to get there requires step number
four which is being extremely diligent
about staying on topic so what you need
to not do is follow any false trains of
reasoning right so let's say accusations
from the past start coming up like oh
last year you went to her birthday party
and you posted photos and it made it
look like i wasn't even your partner
okay so i hear that you're upset about
this thing that happened last year
around this person's birthday i really
care about that and i want to talk to
you about it but i want to keep us on
track with this conversation so can we
make an appointment can we set a time to
return to that conversation to make sure
that we resolve it and in the meantime
can we keep our focus on what's
happening today in this particular
instance and i'm going to say there is a
very strong chance that these things
that get thrown out in conversation it's
not that they don't necessarily hurt but
often they're kind of red herrings like
they're kind of thrown in there to just
further a point and serve as a further
representation of the feeling that's
present for the anxiously attached
person so if you can validate that
there's a feeling around what they're
saying that they want to resolve and
agree that you'll work with them to
resolve it at another point in time
that's going to soothe that feeling a
little bit right because again they feel
like okay i'm going to be seen i'm going
to be heard i'm going to be listened to
and i'm going to say there's a pretty
good chance that that conversation might
be one that they don't actually need to
have right they just need to know that
you'd be willing to have it with them
but you telling them anything along the
lines of like that stupid i'm not gonna
discuss it with you again what they're
hearing you say is your feelings are not
real and that's likely to be super
triggering for them so if things get off
topic setting up a time and date to talk
about those different things and then
actually coming back to them at the time
and date that you set up and saying hey
is now a good time to talk about this is
going to go a really long way in
building trust in your relationship and
the more that the anxiously attached
person trusts you to show up take them
seriously and be sensitive to their
needs but with firm boundaries around
yourself so that you're not giving too
much of yourself the more they're going
to learn okay this person is not going
anywhere conflict doesn't mean
abandonment and you can start to relax a
little bit and actually start working
with the issues that are happening for
you so what you want to make sure you're
doing is anytime the conversation gets
off track bring it back to the issue at
hand but reassure your partner that
anything else that they're struggling
with you will deal with at a specific
concrete point in time making those
appointments and then showing up for
them is going to be really good in
building trust and also means that
you're going to be having important
conversations at times when you're both
feeling a lot more common regulated not
necessarily addressing these giant
things in the moment when someone gets
really angry and blows up right often in
conflict things come up that are
impacting the relationship and have been
for a while but that nobody's brought up
so if you can actually make dates and
appointments to talk about those things
it's going to be super helpful now you
know what the problems are right and you
can make a plan to work on them and i
also want to acknowledge at this point
that not everything the anxiously
attached person brings up is untrue or
is just a projection of their
insecurities right often there are real
problems in the relationship but by the
time you get to this place where
everyone is heated and upset it's
probably going to be hard for them to
present those issues clearly and calmly
and in an unbiased way okay so you want
to make sure that you're dealing with
things as much as possible before
everyone's triggered and upset at each
other and the last thing to do step
number five is be very clear about what
comes next so again remember that the
anxiously attached person has a very big
fear of uncertainty because they feel
like they could be abandoned at any
moment so if you need space after a
conflict if you need some time to think
things through just let them know that
and set a clear point where you will
check back in again that's just going to
help them stay calm and not freak out
about what comes next and it gives you
the space you need if you need space to
think things over and figure out if
there's anything you need to bring up in
your next conversation right maybe
something about the way that the
conflict went down hurt your feeling or
made you feel a little bit rejected or
blamed for something that you don't
necessarily think is fair and those are
also things that you can come back to
and have calm conversations around once
you've both taken the time to kind of
calm down and think things through real
issues in relationships can almost
always wait i think that's something
that's really important to keep in mind
if there is a true problem in your
relationship usually time and thinking
about things carefully actually helps
you solve it so when things are very
urgent very intense and everyone feels
like this has to get worked out right
now it's probably because there's
triggers present right that's how we
feel when our nervous systems are
activated and we're in fight-or-flight
mode right and that's not the place that
we solve problems from that's the place
we have to learn to down regulate from
so that we can approach conflict in a
clear headspace okay that's all i have
to say on this topic for today there
probably will be more follow-up videos
on this because conflict between
insecurely attached people is such a
minefield and there's so much that needs
to get unpacked and so many
communication tools that can be used to
help smooth this over but for now those
are the main things to keep in mind make
sure that you are addressing that fear
of abandonment and working with the
emotion above and beyond everything else
and it's really gonna help in those high
conflict really intense situations all
right i love you guys let me know your
thoughts in the comments and as always i
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and i will see you back
here again really soon
[Music]