hey guys heidi preeb here so today i'm
back for part two of our conflict
management series so the other day we
were talking about how to manage
conflict when your partner has an
anxious attachment style and today i
want to talk about how to manage
conflict with a partner who has an
avoidant attachment style now just like
i said at the very beginning of the
anxiously attached conflict management
video you have to be aware of what your
own attachment style is and what
triggers come up for you in conversation
before you're going to be able to
effectively navigate and use these tools
with an avoidant partner because you're
going to need to know where you need to
make adaptations based on what comes up
for you in hard conversations so as
we're going through this video i really
encourage you to kind of put yourself in
the shoes of someone who is actively
having a conflict with their avoidantly
attached partner and when i'm suggesting
these tools think about what it would
feel like for you in your body to be
using them and at any point that you
feel let's say angry or freaked out or
overwhelmed at the thought of using
these tools just write that down and
that's your homework is to figure out
what you're going to do in those moments
if you're unable to choose a healthy
coping tool because you're too activated
or you're too triggered and that might
be something you want to bring to a
therapist or do some journaling around
or whatever it is to help you figure out
how to handle those moments of intensity
in yourself because conflict always goes
over the best when two people are able
to tend to their own emotional
well-being even in high stress
situations without getting overwhelmed
and having their nervous system kind of
hijacked by that fight-or-flight
response right now very often avoidantly
attached individuals end up dating
anxiously attached individuals it does
not always happen this way but that's a
very very common pairing so if you are
watching this video there's a decent
chance that you are somewhere on the
anxious attachment spectrum and if
that's the case what you need to be
aware of is that the avoidant is not as
aware of their emotional experience as
you are they can lack awareness about
where emotions are influencing their
decision making so when you're in a
conflict situation you don't want to be
going in with high emotion that's likely
to overwhelm them because that's not the
realm that they naturally dwell in and
that's not to say that avoidance don't
feel emotions it's not to say that they
aren't self-aware it's just that when we
are in conflict often our attachment
systems are very activated and when our
attachment systems are activated because
we're under pressure or stress we tend
to default to the defense mechanisms of
our attachment systems so for the
avoidant that means deactivating or kind
of getting distance from their emotional
experience and over relying on thought
or logical distortions and for the
anxiously attached person that means
kind of shutting down logic and a true
exploration of cause and effect and over
relying on what they feel and how they
can communicate their feelings so again
that's not how each style operates all
the time the anxious person when they're
not triggered can be very logical and
they can look at things through a very
rational lens and the avoidant person
when they're not triggered can be very
analytic about their emotional
experiences but in this video we're
talking about what happens once we are
triggered and conflict is kind of
inherently triggering for a lot of
people who have insecure attachment
styles so the number one thing you're
going to want to do if you're in a
conflict situation with someone who has
an avoidant attachment style is present
the issue not through the lens of
emotion but through the lens of this is
a problem that i would like us to work
together on solving and if you can name
the problem in concrete terms so i'll
give an example of this let's say you're
feeling upset or abandoned or whatever
it is because you feel like you're
reaching out to them a lot more than
they're reaching out to you and that
really hurts your feelings now your
instinct might be to go in and talk
about it in emotional language right i
feel really hurt i feel really rejected
and it's not that your emotional
experience doesn't matter but they're
going to hear and be much more receptive
to your emotional experience if you can
kind of communicate it to them in their
language so here's what that might sound
like hey i've been noticing that i tend
to reach out or contact you quite a bit
more than vice versa and i'm really
struggling with that i also know that
it's been causing a lot of conflict for
us so we've had a few fights around this
and the fighting around it seems to be
wasting a lot of our time and energy i
was wondering if you would work with me
to kind of figure out a strategy for how
we could manage communication better so
that we get all of that time and energy
back
right that's very different than going
in and accusing and blaming them of
causing you emotional pain it's showing
them i recognize what's practically not
working here in a way that's affecting
both of our lives and i want us
collectively to work with this in a
better way and i think you'll find that
if you can phrase problems in a slightly
less personal way your avoidant partner
is going to be less likely to shut down
during conflict because they have a very
strong fear of engulfment during
conflicts so what that means is just
like the anxiously attached person is
kind of chronically low level afraid of
being abandoned or high level in some
cases the avoidantly attached person is
chronically on a low level afraid of
being erased by relationships that
someone's going to come in and they're
going to have to give everything they
have to someone else and they're going
to lose their sense of self that's very
scary for the avoidant who really prides
themselves on their autonomy and their
independence so if you can come to them
in a way where you're not asking them to
do anything different you're inviting
them to explore a strategy for solving a
problem that's present for them that's
kind of a win-win situation right and
you're circumnavigating that trigger
that they have of engulfment now step
two is show self-awareness around your
own triggers and develop a strategy for
what's going to happen if either of you
gets triggered in the conversation so at
this stage what you want to do is be
really honest with yourself about what
might come up in the conversation right
if you start feeling like they're being
super cold super detached like they're
not really seeing you as a person and
that warmth that you really need to feel
comfortable is not there you might get
really anxious really activated you
might want to start working overtime to
get your feelings seen and heard and you
need to be aware of the fact that that
might happen and let them know if you
see me doing that this is why i'm
probably fearing abandonment in that
moment i'm probably feeling like you are
going to reason your way out of this
relationship with me so in that moment i
might need us to take a break take a
pause and just say a few kind words to
each other or talk about what the goal
of this conversation is so that i feel
like we're going somewhere constructive
rather than letting my fear get the best
of me and make sure that you're making
it clear that you're going to take
responsibility for your own emotions in
this conversation right so it's not
about hey if you see me doing this you
have to stop and soothe me it's about
hey i know myself i know what comes up
for me in high conflict situations and i
know what i need to resolve that when it
comes up so i'm going to communicate
that to you now because it's easier to
do that now than it is in the heat of
the moment and i think that a fear that
a lot of people who are more on the
anxiously attached side of things have
is that the avoidant will reject them if
they admit that they have emotion
because they think like oh the avoidant
has trouble with emotions so if i
acknowledge that i have them and they
might come up in this conversation
they're going to be really turned off
but that actually makes the avoidantly
attached person feel a lot more
comfortable than you pretending that
everything is fine and that you don't
feel anything because they already know
that you have those feelings they've
seen them come up for you right and it's
definitely not that they want you to
have no feelings it's just that they can
get very overwhelmed by extremely strong
emotions being directed at them so they
need to know kind of the confines and
the boundaries around emotions and if
you can let them know right off the
get-go this might come up for me here's
how i'm going to need to handle it
that's probably actually going to be
very comforting for them because now
they kind of have a blueprint in their
mind for what you need when those
emotions come up so there isn't this
fear and ambiguity around it people with
avoidant attachment styles really
appreciate when other people are
self-aware and take responsibility for
and ownership over their own emotions so
that's what this step is about making
them feel comfortable by showing them
that you're aware of what you feel what
might come up for you and that there's a
strategy you can use to come back from
that now the next step in this process
is sharing the way that you feel using
non-accusatory language okay so that
fear of engulfment is going to come up
for the avoidant if you're telling them
things like i feel this way it's your
fault you have to change here's what you
have to do differently in order for me
to feel okay that's going to bring up
that trigger of this person thinks
something's wrong with me i need to
change the way i am in order to please
them that's a really big trigger for the
avoidant type so what you need to do to
not set that trigger off is own your
emotional experiences as yours a really
good tool for this is non-violent
communication so with non-violent
communication i'll put some links in the
description of this video there are
books and courses you can take on it
it's all about being able to phrase how
you feel using i statements so instead
of you never text me you never show up
for me you can use statements like i'm
feeling pretty lonely lately i don't
really feel like i have many people to
turn to with my problems i've been
noticing that when i want connection
i've been reaching out quite a bit to
you and what it feels like i need in
those moments is a sense of connection
so this is not about you blaming them
this is not saying you should be doing
this to make me happy it's about
communicating your experience as a human
being and then what you're going to want
to do and this i don't think is part of
non-violent communication this is just i
think what's going to be helpful for the
avoidant person is ask them what their
experience of this is so i feel lonely i
feel like i need connection and then i
tend to reach out to you how is it for
you what's going on for you in those
moments and now you're giving them the
freedom to express their point of view
in a way that is not asking them to
erase their point of view right so if
you're saying you don't love me or else
you would text me back more quickly
you're erasing their point of view if
you say here's what's going on on my
side of the fence now i'm curious about
what's going on on your side of the
fence it gives them the opportunity to
be a whole person and to explain what
their experience of life is like and how
that connects to their experience with
you so asking them what they think and
what their perspective is is going to
make them feel seen and like you are
curious about their experience rather
than trying to erase it so what we're
working towards here in all of these
steps is inviting the person with the
avoidant attachment style to collaborate
on a solution rather than trying to
dictate the solution to them right you
might in your mind have a really clear
idea of what's going to make this
problem go away but you might not be
taking into account in your mind when
you're creating that solution whether or
not it's realistic for them and whether
or not they're going to be willing to
implement that or whether it's going to
cause a lot of resentment if they
implement it because a relationship
where instructions are followed but
resentment builds is not a healthy
relationship a relationship where both
people feel like they're finding a
solution together means that that
solution is going to be one that both
people are actually going to be happy to
follow up on so what you want to make
sure you're doing here is creating a
truly open floor for collaboration where
you can both talk about your own
individual perspectives in a
differentiated way so where you clearly
understand
my emotions are my emotions your
emotions are your emotions how can we
work together to make sure that we're
having less conflict or less issues and
that's a solution that's truly going to
work because it's holistic right it's
not erasing anybody's experiences or
anybody's perspectives open-ended
questions are always going to go over
about a million times better with
someone who has an avoidant attachment
style than kind of forced choices or
then demanding that they do something is
going to go over because with open-ended
questions you're acknowledging that
their experience of reality is different
than yours which is something they are
hyper aware of at all times and you're
giving them the opportunity to find a
solution that is truly authentic to them
and if you're on the anxious attachment
spectrum this might take a lot of
practice so it might actually be really
difficult for you at the beginning to
really parse apart what is my emotional
experience versus what is the situation
right so anytime you're thinking
something that's kind of like you're
making me feel this i'm forced to do
this really sit down and try to separate
that out and you can practice by like
journaling there are non-violent
communication worksheets you can
download that really help you separate
out what's the situation what are the
actions that have been taken and then
what is my emotional experience and
there are sheets you can download that
give you like hundreds of emotions you
can pick through so you can really
pinpoint what it is that's coming up for
you and communicate it really clearly
and really cleanly because until you can
take ownership over your own emotional
experience and communicate it clearly
all you're going to really be able to
offer is an enmeshed kind of codependent
solution to problem solving right we
have to be able to figure out what's
mine what someone else is before we can
reach truly interdependent solutions to
problems so the final step in this
process is maybe laying out an action
item so maybe you don't know how to
solve this problem yet right maybe it's
going to take a couple more
conversations but figuring out where do
we go next when are we going to have our
next conversation about it so that you
know the problem will get dealt with and
then restoring the vibe to normal if
that feels okay and authentic for you so
i think a lot of the time people with
avoidant attachment styles are afraid
that if something is a little bit
unresolved there's going to be passive
aggressiveness or it's going to come out
in other areas so if you can find a way
to make a little joke start talking
about what you're going to do that
evening knowing that this problem is
going to be addressed if there's
anything that's currently left
unresolved at another point in time is
gonna allow both of you to kind of rest
easy take the space that you need to
think things through and actually know
on no uncertain terms that it will be
returned to and it will be resolved
that's also gonna help them know that
it's okay for them to not know
everything in the moment and i think
you'll find that when avoidance have a
little bit more time to think about
things that emotional side of them has a
little bit more room to breathe because
they really struggle in moments of high
conflict to access their emotion system
because their activated attachment
system by default kind of cuts them off
from that moments of intense pressure
right so the more time and space you
give them to think things through in a
more calm level way the better a chance
you're actually going to have at them
integrating both of your emotional
experiences and being able to bring more
holistic more loving solutions to the
table so you have to give things the
time and the space they deserve in order
to solve the real problems in
relationships right real problems can
usually wait if we're feeling like
something is super intense and super
imminent it's usually because our
fighter flight systems are present and
something's being triggered for us but
that's not the place that we want to be
solving the real problems from that's a
place where we need to de-escalate down
regulate a bit make sure that in our
conversations when we're in that state
we are not just hopping from trigger to
trigger and figure out how to navigate
the conflict without making things worse
for either party all right that is all i
have to say for today on conflict with
someone who has an avoidant attachment
style let me know in the comments what
your thoughts are and as always i love
you guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]
you