hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about relational Integrity so how to be
proud of the way that we show up inside
of relationships both for ourselves and
other people and today I want to talk
about something that I have had in the
back of my mind as a topic for a long
time which is the phenomenon of the ick
so this is something that in kind of pop
culture is known as getting
repulsed by something that your partner
or friend or loved one does or says to
the point where it might overtake your
experience of that person as a whole and
you might start getting repulsed by them
in general and this is very obviously a
very big problem inside of close
relationships if you suddenly are
looking at somebody who you used to have
a lot of respect and admiration for and
now think that they are utterly
repulsive as a person this obviously is
a bit of a no-go zone for the rest of
your connection to that person unless
you are able to context where that
repulsion is coming from and understand
whether it's something that can be
worked with or not so what I want to
spend this video doing is uncovering or
spending some time on different things
that that sense of repulsion or the ick
might actually be pointing at that run
really deep in our subc conscious and
just giving us some food for thought
things we might want to chew on the next
time this comes online for us and I want
to start out with the kind of
fundamental error that I see people
making when they feel the ick which is
the belief that feeling the ick means
there's either something inherently bad
about you the feeler of it because how
could you a good person suddenly feel
repulsed and overwhelmingly judgmental
of someone you're supposed to love and
care about or believing that it means
something objective about the other
person so you might have the exact
opposite patterning which is believing
that feeling a sense of disgust towards
someone means they are necessarily A
repellent and disgusting person you just
didn't recognize it until now and this
runs really deep right so usually one of
those two mindsets is going to be more
unconscious than it is overt to us some
of us will kind of rioch back and forth
between the two of them so feeling
really disgusted all of a sudden by our
partners or our friends or whoever it is
and then feeling really judgmental at
ourselves for making those judgments
about another person and the error
that's getting made in both cases here
is the belief that feeling disgust or
repulsion towards someone you are in
relationship with says something
objective about either you or the other
person as opposed to it being
information about what's happening in
the relational Dynamic
itself so this is almost always not
information about the quality of one of
your characters it's much much more
often information about how the two of
you relate to each other and the unique
Dynamic that is co-created between you
and I would argue that a lot of the time
disgust or sudden repulsion can actually
be worked with really effec itively
inside of a relationship dynamic because
it's often pointing at something that is
unconscious for one or both of you but
that is really important to one or both
of you the emotion of disgust just like
all other feelings that we have holds
signal when it comes up so what that
means is that just like sadness tells us
it's time to let go of or grieve
something or just like anger tells us
that it's time to set a boundary or say
no to something
disgust often shows up to alert us to
the fact that something is bad for us
but this does not mean the entire person
or the relationship is necessarily bad
for us it could mean that there's some
element of the relational Dynamic that
is bad for us that we haven't made
conscious yet and this can be likened
very easily to something like food
aversion so if I baked a pie and one of
the things inside of the pie was making
me sick but but I didn't know which
ingredient it was what's likely to
happen if I eat that pie a few times is
I would start to just get this idea that
I don't like pie and this is a very
well-studied phenomenon when we don't
know what exactly it is we're reacting
to We tend to associate the whole of the
thing with a kind of no or disgust
response and so if you have something
like let's say an avoidant leaning
attachment style and you're not good at
identifying your individual emotions and
which one of them is online for you
that's causing you pain or that's not
working for you inside of a relational
Dynamic it's going to be easy to start
feeling like the entire relationship or
the entire person is what's wrong and to
start having a disgusted response to the
entire Dynamic and so what we want to be
paying attention to is what exactly is
happening inside of our relationship
Dynamics when we feel the ick come on or
when we start having this overwhelming
sense of dis
towards somebody and how we can isolate
that variable and deal with the problem
where it actually exists and then make a
more conscious and integrated decision
about whether to continue with the
relationship or not so I'm going to
throw four different examples out there
of things that a sudden disgust response
might be more specifically pointing at
but of course this list is very far from
exhaustive so the work that needs to get
done here is listening to your discust
without having too much judgment come
online immediately for yourself or the
other person so refusing to take it as
data that either they are an
unrecoverable bad and disgusting person
or that you are an unrecoverable bad and
judgmental person and instead just
looking at it as sort of neutral I have
this feeling online it's trying to draw
my attention to something let's try to
figure out what it is so the first thing
that a disgusted response could be
pointing towards is a b boundary that
you need to draw that you have not yet
drawn or a way in which you want to
express yourself in the relationship
that one or both of you has not yet made
room for in the relationship so back in
my more avoidant leaning days I used to
have a really strong semi- pervasive
problem with losing attraction to
Partners once I got into a relationship
with them and these might be people I
was wildly attracted to during the
dating phase but what would often happen
is I wasn't very aware of my own
internal emotional experience during the
relationship in a consistent way and so
there would be areas where I would want
to set boundaries on a core emotional
level but something in my patterning and
my conscious mind would go no no no
being close means not setting boundaries
in that way and so I wouldn't set a
boundary where I kind of wanted to set a
boundary or I wouldn't express myself
fully because I would have these ideas
that certain thoughts I had or certain
ways of existing in the world were wrong
and so I shouldn't bring them into my
Partnerships or I would have beliefs
that my partner couldn't handle certain
parts of me so I would keep those to
myself and then I wouldn't understand
why all of a sudden I lost attraction to
my partner and it took me a lot of years
of unpacking to realize that if we are
not bringing enough of ourselves into
relationships if we are not staying
attuned to our own boundaries and
setting them where we need to set them
often this feeling of disgust or
aversion comes online to try to start
setting those boundaries for us because
if I have certain things I want that I
believe I can't have inside of a
partnership because I have these
implicit beliefs about what I can and
can't do in a relationship my body isn't
going to stop wanting those things right
maybe it's as simple as just having more
alone time but if I don't get that need
met for long enough and especially if I
don't even bring up to my partner that
that's a need that I have what my system
is eventually going to do is it's going
to start looking at my partner and just
feeling this no response which can often
feel like disgust or repulsion so what
boundaries are naturally there to help
us do in a relationship is to help us
stay in connection with someone in a way
that also allows us to have a robust
enough experience of ourselves to not
grow resentful of the other and if we
aren't setting the right right
boundaries in place in our relationship
our unconscious is going to come online
and start just trying to get the
disregulated agent which it might see as
the whole of the other person out of our
lives so that we can get back to feeling
like ourselves but this doesn't have to
be the only way we do things right if we
feel that sense of disgust come online
and we start asking ourselves where is
there not enough me in this relationship
or where are there not boundaries that
maybe I want to have boundaries this can
become a really useful inquiry and it
might lead us to having some tough
conversations or setting some boundaries
that we might initially feel some guilt
or stress over but in the long run if it
allows us to return to our relationships
feeling A Renewed sense of appreciation
respect and attraction for our partners
it's likely to have a really good impact
on the overall health and potential
longevity of the relationship in the
long run the second thing the ick or a
disgust response might be pointing
towards is misattunement so I remember
at one point I was dating someone who I
was wildly attracted to but the first
time we kissed I had this sudden
repulsion response come online and a
couple weeks later I was unpacking it
with a couple of friends and someone
asked me what were the conditions under
which that person and kissed you and I
let them know kind of the scenario we
were in and everything that led up to it
and she thought about it for a minute
and when is it possible that you wanted
to kiss that person you just didn't want
to kiss them in that moment or in that
specific set of
circumstances and I thought about it and
went oh my God that is exactly what
happened actually overall this person
was incredibly attractive to me but that
first instance of something more
physically intimate happening between us
happened in a moment where I felt like
they weren't really attuned to me they
couldn't really pick up on the fact that
that wasn't what I was wanting then and
there and so my body came online with
this signal of no towards the person and
towards the event but that doesn't
necessarily mean that there was nothing
else about that person or that
relationship that could still be worked
with and what I started to realize the
more I really dug into this idea of the
it as misattunement
is that in a lot of my relationships
especially because again I came from the
more avoidant side of the spectrum I
wasn't really paying attention to the
signals that I was or wasn't giving off
to my partners and more often than not I
wasn't really displaying signals of
discomfort in instances where I was
uncomfortable and so very often my
partners would think that they were in
connection with me and synced up really
well with me when in reality I was
feeling like I didn't really want to be
in that scenario or like I wasn't fully
comfortable with some aspect of how we
were related and so then when someone
who I was dating would come to me and
have these kind of big gooey in love
eyes I would get repulsed because they
weren't seeing that I wasn't feeling the
same and what I was repulsed by was the
misattunement that was happening between
us we weren't reading each other's
signals effectively and responding to
each other based on what was actually
going on for each of us
and in my case I had to learn that it's
really hard for people to attune to me
properly if I am not being honest about
what's going on for me
internally and this wasn't a conscious
attempt at dishonesty right it wasn't
like I was super aware of what I was
feeling but then I was just lying about
it though that was sometimes the case if
I thought that it would be rude to
express what I was feeling it was very
often that I just had this pattern of
emotional inhibition and that my own
feelings weren't always conscious to me
in the moment and so they weren't always
available for the other person to read
and so they weren't able to respond to
me in a super accurate way but there's
also definitely cases where maybe
somebody is looking at you and instead
of seeing the actual you who exists in
front of them they're projecting some
type of fantasy onto you or some type of
story onto you that isn't accurate to
who you are and what's happening for you
in the moment and that might also
produce an ick response that's pointing
towards the type of relational Dynamic
that you don't want to get into so once
again there's no hard and fast rule for
what is happening in any instance where
we're feeling this sense of disgust what
we want to do is figure out where it's
coming from and ask ourselves the
question over and over again is this
something that can be worked on so is
this an area where I have room to grow
maybe I could be more expressive in my
emotions and then other people would be
able to attune to me better and then
maybe I could have a better relationship
Dynamic with this person or is this an
area where I feel like it's kind of
non-negotiable maybe I really do feel
like this person has me on a pedestal as
hard as I try to get myself off of it in
their minds and that might just be
really uncomfortable for me in a way
that I want to walk away from but in any
case the more awareness we gain around
this the more accurate our
decision-making gets so we're not
suddenly abandoning a relationship for
reasons that aren't even clear to us and
then coming back to it the moment that I
response kind of clears out of her
awareness we're actually understanding
what's happening inside of our Dynamics
and making conscious choices about them
another thing an ick response might be
pointing us towards is an area that we
have shame bound so if you've been
around this channel for a while you've
probably heard me talk quite a bit about
what toxic shame and shame around the
fact that we have needs can do to our
relationships but if not I have linked a
couple of videos in the description of
this one that will go into that in more
detail but essentially if there are
things we've internalized from a young
age that we must do in order to be
worthy of Love or in order to deserve
any sense of connection with other
people and then we see someone violating
that principle we are likely to have the
same disgust response towards that
person that we have towards ourselves
when the urge to behave in that way
comes up because dis just works to
inhibit Behavior so if I think I cannot
be loud and self-expressive if I want to
be in connection with people I can't be
dramatic I can't make a big show out of
my emotions what's going to happen is
anytime I have the urge to be more
expressive or dramatic I'm going to feel
disgust towards myself if that is how my
conditioning worked at a young age if I
was met with repulsion or disgust if I
showed that part of myself I'm going to
internalize that as I grow up and then
if I see someone else behaving in that
way that same disgusted response that
comes online to inhibit my behavior is
highly likely to get directed towards
them but what's actually happening there
is that my own system of inhibition is
just being projected onto another person
and so if we figure out that this is
what's happening we're also getting
presented with an opportunity to do some
re-evaluating of whether we want to keep
that program online or not so there are
certain things that we might decide yeah
I am perfectly comfortable having a
disgusted response around that thing
maybe I have disussed around the concept
of violence and that actually is aligned
with my values I don't want to commit
acts of violence and so I don't
necessarily need to undo that disgust
response and make myself more
comfortable with it but maybe I have
disgust around an area like
self-expression and when that comes into
my conscious awareness I might want to
evaluate it and go do I actually want to
be a little bit more expressive now that
as an adult I have the opportunity to
choose who I'm in relationship with
which might mean I could go put myself
in a group of people who really value
self-expression and I could enjoy
letting that version of myself come out
instead of inhibiting it and the more
I'm able to give myself that experience
it's likely I'm not going to feel as
disgusted watching other people Express
themselves because I'm no longer shaming
that thing in myself
so sometimes the ick or a disgust
response we have towards someone else is
simply pointing at an area of ourselves
that we respond to with disgust but that
we might want to do some reconsidering
of or not which leads us to the fourth
thing that I would encourage you to
consider as an option if you're feeling
the ick or sudden repulsion towards your
partner which is that this repulsion
might be pointing towards differences in
values that the two of you have so I
remember one time being at a radical
honesty Workshop where I wanted to work
with the ick I was dating someone new
and I had this feeling when they did
this specific thing that I was just
really turned off and kind of grossed
out by them but I didn't identify the
thing they were doing as a morally bad
or wrong thing to do and so I decided to
bring it into this workshop and focus
some attention on it and what the
workshop leader encouraged me to do was
really tune in to what happened in my
body when I thought of this person doing
this thing and I noticed that actually
what would happen is my muscles would
start to kind of contract and I would
start holding a bunch of tension and I
noticed that actually the feeling behind
it was anger which was curious for me
because once again I didn't think that
this person was doing anything
objectively wrong but what I realized
the more I sat with that anger and tried
not to judge myself for having it was
the that this person just had a very
different value than me in this
particular area and when I would see
them expressing that value I would get
angry because I wanted them to have a
different value and the reason I wanted
them to have a different value was
because even though their value system
was not something that I saw as morally
wrong I recognized that it was pretty
incompatible from my core values and
what things I wanted out of life and
that meant that they probably weren't
going to be a good good long-term
romantic partner for me there were going
to be someone who I always felt like I
would have to change on a fundamental
level if I wanted to be with
them and realizing that then turned the
feeling into grief because I recognize
that there was nothing wrong with this
person or with me we just weren't
compatible as long-term Partners but
maybe we would be compatible as
friends and so this inquiry of what
what's going on for me when I feel this
disgust response what's happening in my
body when the person does the thing that
I feel the I towards can be one that can
lead us to some really unexpected places
which sometimes can actually lead us to
a place of increased intimacy and
closeness with the person as well as
more self-awareness within ourselves but
other times it might lead us to
recognizing that there are parts of the
relationship we just can't work with or
that we don't want to work with with
because we would be better suited with
someone who has a more similar set of
values to ours but in either case what
it allows us to walk away with is
instead of confusion and judgment
towards either the other person and
ourselves Clarity and compassion because
we can recognize I'm okay and the other
person is okay there's just something
within this Dynamic that isn't working
for me and now I have the opportunity to
decide whether I want to work on that
thing to make it explicit for myself and
then either bring it into the
relationship and work on it with the
other person or just figure out which
boundaries I need to set or ways in
which I need to show up differently in
the relationship to stop feeling that
resentment and
disgust or we can part ways in a much
more clear and unambiguous light which
is likely to feel like a much more
secure experience of something ending
for both people
involved and again at the end of the day
these are all inquiries you need to do
inside of your own experience and
decisions that need to be made that are
very delicate in nature so it's okay to
move slowly through this and to get
feedback on Route and to be a little bit
uncertain and kind of test different
things out to see what fits as you're
working through this but the idea is
that we're moving away from this mindset
of disgust necessarily means that either
I am bad and wrong or the other person
is and more towards the mindset of
disgust is just another emotion that is
giving me information about what my
needs and values are and if I can listen
to it I have the potential to get to
somewhere much more honest and much more
compassionate than if I continuously
just try to keep it out of my
awareness all right that's all I have to
say for today on this topic but as
always any questions thoughts that you
have coming up as you go through this
video please leave them in the comment
section below I love you guys I hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]