hey guys heidi preeb here i have been
getting a lot of requests for more infp
content so i decided to kind of kick
this off with a video that i already did
for enfps and as always i was like are
these two types really that different
when it comes to this topic that it
warrants two different videos and then i
sat down and wrote some stuff out and
was like oh yeah this needs to be its
own video so this is a video about the
main things that infps tend to struggle
with in relationships and this doesn't
necessarily mean that these are like
fatal flaws that can't be worked on it
doesn't mean that this will apply to all
infps it just means that these are some
things to kind of watch out for in your
own psyche if you are an infp because
you might be a little bit more inclined
towards them than people of other
personality types that being said a lot
of these will also apply to enfps or
isfps since those two types share a lot
of cognitive functions in a similar
order to the infp so these aren't
exclusive to the infp it's more just a
conglomerate of the things that infps
tend to experience difficulty with so
i'm going to move kind of
chronologically from challenges that
might come up more towards the beginning
of a relationship to challenges that
might come up as the relationship gets
more serious and challenge number one
that we're going to start with is the
infp romanticizing red flags so this is
one that i think is a lot more common to
younger infps i don't necessarily see it
as much with let's say infps in like
midlife and beyond but it can show up
for absolutely anyone and this one is
kind of a double-edged sword because one
of the most beautiful and brilliant
things about the infp is that they have
the tendency to see the best in everyone
and to really understand that people who
behave badly and people who and people
who hurt other people are very often
hurting themselves they have a very deep
interest usually in the human psyche and
understanding psychology and
understanding why people act the way
they do and that is absolutely a
strength like i think that that is one
of the biggest reasons why infps make
for some of the best counselors and
teachers and communicators because they
really take the time to understand
people in a way that a lot of other
types don't but where this can become a
little bit of a problem for them is when
they give people too much credit or too
much of the benefit of the doubt
especially early on in a relationship
and it can cause them
to either miss or romanticize red flags
so missing a red flag might look like
them kind of explaining away someone's
bad behavior or maybe they're aware from
the get-go of some bad behavior
someone's done in a past relationship
but they find a way to kind of
rationalize and justify it and go okay
well maybe i don't know the full story
maybe i need to hear it right from them
and they will generally give people the
benefit of the doubt far beyond what
other people would and again this is a
great thing in some situations and a
really tricky thing in other situations
because there can also be this tendency
to go one step beyond ignoring red flags
and to veer into the romanticizing red
flags territory okay so what that looks
like is the infp actually getting really
sold on the idea that this person is
just very misunderstood and they are the
only person who can understand them so
the fact that this person has some
negative qualities that other people
might shy away from is actually more
attractive in some cases to the infp
because they want to give that person
the feeling of no one else will give you
the benefit of the doubt but i will
because i'm very understanding and
empathetic and i want to show you that
people can be that way and there can
also be kind of a fantasy there around
like turning someone's life around maybe
having a little bit of a savior complex
and wanting to be able to help people to
change in a way that is more
compassionate and loving and caring and
again that is not a bad
mission in and of itself
but
when you get stuck in this as an infp
and again this is something i see a lot
more with younger infps it can for very
obvious reasons not end up the best so
this is just one to watch out for at the
beginning of a budding relationship are
you bypassing red flags are you kind of
noticing them but putting them on the
back burner or are you actually going
straight towards the red flags and going
oh this is a cool opportunity for me to
help someone change and grow and develop
and again on a small scale that can be a
good thing in any relationship small
small-scale ones will come up along the
way so you don't need to worry there
will be lots to work through and be
empathetic about as the relationship
continues but you don't want to be
starting from that place of oh i'm the
only person who can kind of help or save
this person right that's not the basis
of a healthy relationship of any sort
unfortunately relationship challenge
number two that i see infps really
struggling with particularly in the
beginning of new relationships is
panicking about problems that do not
exist yet so because you lead with
introverted feeling as your dominant
function as an infp and extroverted
intuition is your auxiliary function you
don't spend a lot of time really living
in the present moment now what that
means in a relationship is that you are
always kind of thinking 10 steps ahead
you aren't really slowed down and
focused on what's happening in the
moment the same way a type who values
let's say extroverted sensing might be
but as soon as you meet someone your
mind is already kind of worrying with
thoughts about where could this go what
could this look like in the future and
sometimes that means you are picking up
on potential things that could happen
down the line that are nowhere near
happening that might not even have a
solid basis in the reality of who that
person is or what your relationship
dynamic is but it is very natural for
your mind to kind of go there and this
can lead to infps talking themselves out
of relationships before they've even
really given them a chance to begin and
get off the ground and i find that this
is more often a habit of slightly older
infps who have a bit of a relationship
history to draw on and having that
introverted sensing as your tertiary
function might lead you to make
connections between things that have
happened in the past in prior
relationships and little tiny things
that you see present in a budding
relationship that you're worried means
the past is about to repeat itself okay
and it's really really important to be
conscious and aware at this phase of a
relationship developing as an infp of
what is happening in real life versus
what is happening in your head okay
where do you have real evidence of
things going wrong or potentially going
wrong versus where are you kind of
running away with a disaster fantasy and
a good way to combat this is to just get
a little bit better at reality testing
so reality testing is one of the facets
of emotional intelligence which is where
you just take the story that you have in
your head and run it against reality try
to find some concrete evidence or proof
for or against whatever it is that
you're worried about so that you have a
little bit more information to go off of
because if the things that you're
picking up on are true red flags that
might lead to really big problems down
the line it's a great thing to be very
aware of those right that's the antidote
to challenge number one but i find that
a lot of the time what infps spend their
time hyper fixating on is let's say
something they think that their partner
doesn't like about them something they
think will make them incompatible with
their partner down the line but instead
of showing up and communicating those
things to their partner asking hey is
this a way that you feel is this
something that you think about me or us
or our relationship
will this potential thing be a problem
for you down the line if it comes up
instead of having those conversations
infps can choose to ruminate over them
instead and that keeps it out of the
realm of the reality which is where
problems get solved and keeps it
concentrated inside of their own minds
where problems just grow and grow and
grow right so to combat this one it
really requires some showing up some
communicating honestly and openly some
figuring out of where your mutual values
and boundaries are and that's hard for
anyone in any relationship but the good
part about this is that because the infp
is so
naturally tuned into their own feelings
and other people's feelings if they
decide to have this conversation they
have a lot of skills that other types
don't necessarily have for navigating
that language and navigating those kind
of uncomfortable spaces so use your gift
as an infp in situations like this to
make sure you're having those
conversations instead of just allowing
them to grow and grow and grow inside of
your head into problems that might never
happen but can nonetheless feel so
overwhelming that you might consider
ending a relationship before it even has
the chance to begin okay don't let that
happen it is so avoidable challenge
number three that i see infps struggle
with
even before the dating phase sometimes
this can come up in the phase where
let's say you're just single and going
out and meeting people and taking
interest in people i see a lot of infps
struggling with seeming a lot colder and
more distant than they actually are so
if you could pry open an infp's brain
and look inside it is generally filmed
with very warm thoughts about people
like infps tend to be quite positive
about the people in their lives
particularly the people who they like or
are interested in or want to afford more
of a relationship with they are very
good at seeing the best in people and
thinking wonderful thoughts about people
but they aren't always as good at
communicating those thoughts so having
introverted feeling gives you this
specific feeling sometimes of thinking
that everyone can like hear your
thoughts because your emotions and your
thoughts are so loud inside your own
head there can be this natural
assumption that that somehow escapes as
you're living your day-to-day life and
other people just know how you feel and
the problem is this is not always the
case so an infp might feel really really
strongly towards someone they might meet
someone and really be interested in them
but not emote that enough to make the
other person clear on the fact that
that's how they feel and this is largely
an accident like i've heard a lot of
infps talk about this and it doesn't
even necessarily have to be a romantic
relationship i've heard infps say
they're surprised that their friends or
their family members or their co-workers
don't know how positively they feel
towards them and are surprised when they
find out and that's just because as an
infp you are an introverted type and
your first instinct is not necessarily
to emote everything that you're thinking
or feeling that takes conscious practice
but it can often lead to this big
disconnect between the way that the infp
thinks about others and the way that
they are showing up and letting them
know how they feel about them so another
kind of relationship challenge that
might stop a relationship from getting
off the ground before it even has the
chance to begin is the infp not
expressing their emotions despite the
fact that they're feeling them and again
this is a learned skill and it's a
learned skill for any type this isn't
just difficult for the infp it's just
that the infp might be the type who has
the greatest discrepancy between the
kind and warm and loving and caring and
curious thoughts that they have and
their natural propensity to express them
isafp probably struggles with that in
about equal measure so again this is
just something to be aware of as an infp
if you're feeling these wonderful and
warm and curious thoughts towards
someone are you sure that they know
you're thinking that right have you made
that clear to them because that's a
really important building block for
getting to know someone is letting them
know hey i'm interested in you i want to
get to know more about you so the next
challenge is one that again i do see
more with younger infps i think that the
more the infp grows up and has
experiences with relationships and kind
of notices what didn't didn't go so well
they can veer out of this tendency and
actually become very very adept at doing
the opposite of this but early on in
life something that i see a lot of infps
struggling with is not wanting to kind
of give up information about themselves
they want someone to come along and
absolutely pry things out of them and
this is absolutely a product of leading
with introverted feeling so when you
have introverted feeling in the dominant
position in your cognitive stacking so
that is infps and isfps there is this
deep deep understanding of the self this
deep self-awareness that can develop
this very intense familiarity of the
landscape of your own mind and that is
such a brilliant and beautiful trait but
there can also be a little bit of ego
around it and this is true for any type
who has fi in their dominant or
auxiliary position so enfps and esfps
are also very guilty of this we just
tend to talk a little bit more so it
spills out more naturally
but infps and isfps can fall into the
trap of going because i am so aware of
minor landscape i need someone else to
come along and be fascinated by it and
to want to ask more and more questions
and kind of see me as like this unending
fascinating book that they want to
peruse through and if the other person
isn't necessarily showing this
insatiable curiosity the infp might
mistake that to mean that they're
disinterested in them but what that
could actually mean is that the other
person just doesn't understand that the
infp wants that maybe they think that
they're being very respectful of the
infp's boundaries by not asking too many
prime questions or by kind of giving
them the space to open up in the way
that they feel comfortable when they
feel comfortable but there can be this
kind of romanticized notion among young
fi doms of wanting someone to come break
down all of their walls and not
realizing that it's actually very
healthy for someone to not want to break
down your walls right because other
people see walls as boundaries and
they're like yeah you can reveal
yourself to me at a pace you're
comfortable with and i'm going to
respect that you'll tell me what you
want to tell me about yourself when
you're ready to and this is very
different than someone who is just truly
disinterested in you right this doesn't
mean that if someone's paying you no
attention and not answering your texts
they're just respecting your boundaries
but if you really pay attention if you
really focus in on the relationship that
you're forming the difference is usually
very clear between someone who's just a
bit confused about where your boundaries
are and someone who just doesn't care
and isn't interested in getting to know
you right there is a natural kind of
give and take to relationships so if
you're asking someone lots of questions
about themselves and they're asking you
an equal number of questions about
yourself that probably means that you're
on a good track right but don't feel
like someone needs to be prying into the
depths of your soul and trying to break
down all of your walls that's asking
someone to do the work that you need to
be doing which is figuring out when it's
the right time to disclose what and
offering information up about yourself
to other people without them having to
pry even though it feels less romantic
maybe at the end of the day all it
actually means is that you're with
someone who has a pretty good
understanding of boundaries and that is
gonna become really attractive the
longer the relationship goes on
relationship challenge number five which
everyone probably was expecting as
relationship challenge number one
because it can show up at any point in
the dating process so when you're single
when you're starting to see someone when
you're in a serious relationship when
you have been married for 50 years and
have four children together and this one
is putting your partner on a pedestal
now this is one that all fi users are
very guilty of infps enfps isfps esfps
other types can obviously be very guilty
of this as well but having fi high up in
your stacking makes you particularly
prone to this and i need to call us all
out here for a minute and say that we
think this is a nice thing to do right
we think that thinking of our partner in
these idealized and really beautiful and
wonderful ways and kind of putting
embellishments on top of the reality of
who someone is inside of our own minds
is a generous and loving thing to do
because we're seeing the best in people
but that is absolutely not what we're
doing when we're putting someone on a
pedestal okay when you put someone on a
pedestal you refuse to see the real them
and when you refuse to see the real
someone because you're not necessarily
paying attention to the things that
they're struggling with to their genuine
challenges and flaws to their
insecurities and the ways in which
they're a little bit afraid to show you
the more human parts of themselves you
are cutting the opportunity for
connection off at the knees okay because
real connection is built on two people
who truly and deeply see each other for
better but also for worse and again the
for worse can't just be the romanticized
flaws that you have it has to be the
real stuff the stuff that is actually
hard for the other person to share with
you and for that to happen they need a
very safe and authentically open space
for sharing within the relationship
when you put someone on a pedestal and
decide that they only have good and
wonderful and glowing qualities you rob
them of the opportunity to actually
share themselves with you because you're
going to ignore all of those more
vulnerable and difficult parts of
themselves that they try to bring to the
table and this is probably the number
one mistake that i see fi users of all
types making in any relationship is
thinking that they're doing their
partner a favor by thinking of them in
this way when what they're really doing
is creating a fantasy relationship
instead of a real relationship right and
it does not feel good for the other
person to have fantasies projected onto
them okay it feels like they are now
expected to live up to this kind of
glorified version of themselves that
doesn't feel real that might make them
feel like oh i'm not good enough for you
as i am i have to be this kind of
shining star that you see me as and it
also just feels lonely to be on a
pedestal right because it feels like
there's no one there who has your actual
back there's only someone who wants to
kind of clap at and admire you and
admiration is not real love right
admiration creates expectation to
continue to behave in these very
specific ways that are inauthentic so if
you want to do your partner at any stage
of a relationship
a very deep and loving favor
take them off the pedestal refuse to see
them as perfect as flawless as someone
whose flaws are romantic and beautiful
and only wonderful i see a lot of fi
users romanticizing certain flaws but
then when their partner comes to them
with a true challenge or struggle they
almost get a little bit mad because for
a moment it knocks their partner off
this pedestal they've put them on in
their brain and that really sucks for
your partner if you cannot face their
true flaws and challenges right that
really takes away the opportunity to
build true connection and so i think
that this is the biggest hurdle that all
fi users have to learn to get over in
relationships if they want true
deep connection with people rather than
just kind of shallow fantasy
relationships that happen mostly inside
of their heads refuse to put anyone on a
pedestal refuse to look at anyone and
see the answer to your problems refuse
to look at anyone and see a romantic
love story see only what actually is
focus only on the actual connections
you're building in real time and the
feedback that you're getting from that
other person and you're gonna start
building
real
true
non-anxiety-inducing relationships
because they're founded around the bare
bones of what actually allows a
relationship to grow and thrive which is
real-time interaction not fantasy and
idealization that's a trap that it's
very tempting to get stuck in but that
ultimately leads absolutely nowhere that
you want to go relationship challenge
number six that i often see infps
struggling with usually in the phase of
a relationship where things are becoming
a little bit more stabilized so at the
beginning of relationships infps tend to
be very all in they're excited about
relationships they want to get to know
someone they are a little bit more lacks
with their boundaries than they might
usually be so they might be a little bit
more social than normal a little bit
more out of their shell than they
normally are in day-to-day life because
this feeling of getting to know a new
person and being excited about them
gives them a lot more social energy
but as the relationship kind of
stabilizes and settles down they tend to
revert a little bit more to their more
naturally introverted ways and depending
on who they're dating this could be
either a natural mutual reclusion let's
say they're with another introvert or it
could cause a little bit of tension
because let's say they're dating someone
who is a lot more extroverted than they
are who has come to expect this level of
kind of engagement and reciprocity from
the infp and gets confused when suddenly
that energy starts to drop a little bit
and they need some more time to withdraw
and attend to their introverted
functions and this is a normal part of
any relationship right no matter what
your personality types are there's going
to be that honeymoon period where
nothing can go wrong and you're staring
lovingly in each other's eyes and then
it's going to change to a different
phase where you're really working out
like what does this look like in reality
what does our day-to-day life look like
together now that the kind of stars and
the magic is settling a little bit and
what's really important for the infp at
this point is to remember that they do
need a lot of space okay even though
they might want to please their partner
so badly by just going yeah i'll give
you the same amount of time and
investment and energy that i was giving
you at the very beginning of the
relationship that's not necessarily
sustainable for them long term as
introverts so it can be difficult for
infps to set those boundaries because
again they want so badly to make other
people happy to make their partners feel
comfortable but it's not going to work
if you're making your partner feel
comfortable at the expense of what you
need which is a lot of alone time a lot
of space a lot of room to revert to and
take care of your introverted feeling
and introverted sensing functions and it
is so okay to ask for space in a
relationship it is so okay to need a lot
of time for yourself you just have to
learn how to communicate that in a kind
way so i find that a lot of infps will
kind of veer too far in this direction
of compromising their own boundaries
compromising their own boundaries
compromising their own boundaries and
then kind of snapping and just taking
space without necessarily communicating
in a reassuring way that that's what
they need and then their partner can be
a little bit confused about what's going
on and this is such an easy thing to
overcome because all it requires is
having a couple conversations with
someone where you talk about what your
needs are and if there's pushback learn
to see that as a red flag right that
doesn't necessarily mean you have to end
the relationship but you need to learn
to be very firm about your boundaries
and notice whether the other person is
taking that well or not and again being
firm doesn't mean being unkind it can
sound like hey i love spending time with
you just so you know here's a little bit
about who i am and how i normally
operate and i really hope that we can
continue this relationship and in order
for me to do that healthily i have to
take a certain amount of time and space
and here's what that looks like for me
right it can be a very loving and
optimistic conversation where you're
talking about how to make this work long
term instead of assuming that your
partner is going to panic or be mad if
you set those boundaries right if you're
with someone with a certain level of
emotional intelligence it's probably
gonna go well healthy people appreciate
other people's boundaries so you don't
need to be afraid of setting those down
it can be a really really wonderful and
growing thing to approach even if it's a
little bit intimidating at the beginning
relationship challenge number seven and
this is one that i see showing up at
absolutely every stage of the
relationship for infps or i should say
that has the potential to show up at any
stage of the relationship and this is
mistaking love the feeling for love the
verb so again infps largely live inside
of their minds they have this very rich
and vivid inner world that is full of
feeling and a lot of that feeling is
very positive very warm towards their
partner but they can sometimes forget
that feeling good thoughts about someone
does not translate into the other person
feeling loved unless you make that
transition out of your head and into
reality through loving actions right and
it sounds very silly when you hear it
laid out because it sounds very obvious
but again all fi users can actually be
very very guilty of this thinking that
because we think such great and warm and
kind thoughts towards someone the other
person automatically knows that that's
how we feel
but love the feeling and love the verb
so doing and acting in loving ways
towards someone are very different
things right and it's a bit dangerous to
confuse the two because if we think that
thinking good thoughts about someone is
enough to sustain a healthy relationship
we are going to absolutely neglect our
partners and then feel confused about
why things are going wrong right it's
really important to be aware of what it
is that our partner needs from us in
order to feel loved by us so let's say
your partner is a words of affirmation
person then communicating those warm
feelings towards them might be all that
they need to know that you love them but
let's say they are a quality time person
if you're not giving them enough quality
time if you're not clearing your
schedule and physically showing up for
them in ways that make them really
notice that you're there and present
with them even if you have all the warm
thoughts on earth about them they're not
necessarily going to feel fulfilled in
the relationship and of course this
should be a two-way street right you
should both be very aware of what each
other needs in order to feel loved and
how to give it to each other but i
really do see and have myself fallen
victim many times in my life to this
kind of trap of someone coming to an fi
user and being like i don't really feel
loved by or connected to you in as deep
of a way as i want to and the fi user
kind of getting defensive and being like
i think loving thoughts about you all
the time what are you talking about like
morning tonight i just think loving
thoughts about you but we forget that
thinking loving thoughts about someone
feels really good inside of our own
heads but it does nothing for the other
person until we translate those thoughts
into actions right otherwise it's kind
of like we're just watching a nice movie
about love in our heads but that doesn't
do anything for the other person that's
for us right those positive feelings
we're feeling they're kind of selfish
they're kind of just us watching a movie
in our brains about how happy we are but
if we're not actually showing up for the
other person communicating our feelings
figuring out what they need in order to
feel loved and then doing that we are
not loving someone we are romanticizing
someone those are very different things
right having positive thoughts is nice
but it's not love love is the actual
work you do of showing up communicating
connecting with someone and actually
being there for them in real time and
space that's love love the verb and if
your relationship does not include a lot
of that it's not going to be a healthy
or growing or mutually fulfilling
relationship it's just gonna be you
watching a movie in your head okay and
that is a trap that all fi users are
hyper at risk of falling into and i just
really encourage all of us to be super
super aware of it are we actually
showing up in real time for the people
that we have these kind thoughts about
or are we just dissociating into a
fantasy about them one of those things
is love the other one really not at all
relationship challenge number what are
we on eight i think this is eight that i
see infp struggling with often in
long-term relationships is thinking that
conflict is an inherently bad thing and
again this is kind of a double-edged
sword because i think that early on a
lot of infps really struggle with this
but then they can become almost super
adept at it if they learn the language
for navigating conflict in a way that is
healthy and growing i think that infps
can be some of the best mediators the
best communicators if and when they
choose to consciously develop this skill
okay but the more an infp but generally
speaking before that awareness develops
the more an infp grows connected to
someone the more they tend to feel like
this person is a part of me that is what
introverted feeling kind of feels like
when they're in love but this can lead
to this feeling of therefore if we have
any conflict anything where i start to
see your limits are here and my limits
are here or we're not aligned in some
way it can be perceived as a threat to
that love when really it's not a threat
to that love at all right
conflict can be a very healthy and very
growing thing because for someone to
love you completely and fully they need
to know where your boundaries are
boundaries are the things that we put up
to show people like here is where i end
and you begin right it's like a property
line if you're going to a house and they
have a fence around their property you
understand
everything within these bounds is that
property and i can marvel at it and
enjoy it and be appreciative that i
understand where it begins and ends and
what it is and is not and the same is
true of human beings when we put
boundaries up when we show other people
here's where i end and you begin and
often we see those lines the most
clearly during healthy conflict it gives
the other person the gift and the option
of appreciating you for all that you are
of really understanding here's where i
end and you begin and i can now stand
beside this fence and marvel at
everything that's inside of it right i'm
not missing anything because i'm
standing too close and i find that a lot
of infps tend to get drawn into very
people-centered fields where they end up
learning a lot of really awesome
conscious communication tools um
non-violent communication is an example
that i bring up in a lot of my videos
and i find that this model tends to work
really well for infps who tend to have
an above average awareness of what their
feelings and needs are so when they
learn to express that in a way that
naturally differentiates themselves from
their partner and allows them to
understand where that dynamic space
between them is this can be incredibly
growing and incredibly healthy for
relationships but step one is just
learning to let go of that fear of any
conflict meaning that love is being
threatened right healthy relationships
are built on productive conflict where
you understand here's your limit here's
my limit where can we compromise and
where can we not compromise that is the
mark of a relationship that's gonna be
able to make it if you are never having
conversations that feel a little bit
uncomfortable that's actually a giant
red flag right healthy productive
conflict is a green flag in
relationships and you might not love it
at the time
but if you want to build healthy
sustainable long-term relationships this
is something that all feelers have to
get a little bit more comfortable than
we might naturally be with so step one
is just don't perceive it as a lack of
love if there's a conflict or there's
something that comes up between you and
your partner learn to see it as a growth
opportunity and once again infps who
learn to do this tend to very quickly
become very very good at it so see this
as an opportunity for you to step more
fully into yourself and become the
excellent and assertive communicator
that you already naturally have the
skills for being you just have to learn
to train and nurture them within
yourself relationship challenge number
nine that i see infps making again kind
of at every phase of the relationship
but that can particularly come into play
later in life or as a relationship
becomes more serious and long-lasting
which is that the infp assumes that they
can read their partner's mind so because
introverted feeling is so curious about
other people because we want so deeply
so badly to understand people on a very
core level fi can sometimes become a
little bit over confident and think that
we know other people more than they know
themselves or that our partner doesn't
necessarily need to communicate with us
because we already know everything that
they're thinking and feeling and going
through
and this is definitely not always the
case right so it's very important to not
stop consciously checking in with your
partner right early on in the
relationship infps tend to be very good
at this because they naturally are
curious about people so they ask a lot
of questions they ask a lot of
clarifiers they really want to make sure
that they're getting to the heart of who
this person is and what makes up their
psyche but then 30 years down the line
they might kind of unconsciously start
thinking okay i've got it now there's
not that much new in there for me to
learn or interpret and so they might
start operating in certain situations as
if they have already consulted their
partner about something when they
haven't and it's so important to not
allow that to become the case in your
relationship even if you know this
person pretty well even if 90 of the
time you're able to predict what they
want there is always that ten percent
where you need to give them the benefit
of the doubt and if you don't it could
cause a lot of problems in the
relationship and what's more people like
being checked in with right even if
you've been with someone for a really
long time it helps with keeping the
attraction alive in the relationship if
you are perpetually curious about and
getting to know your partner in new and
different ways so don't assume that you
can mind read your partner that you know
what they want and what their interests
and what their curiosities are at every
point in the relationship because even
if you're right even if you truly do
most of the time know what their
decision is going to be it just feels
good to be checked in with at any stage
it feels good to feel like my partner is
still curious about me you probably want
that from your partner so don't forget
to give it to someone else when you're
in a long-term relationship and continue
to get to know your partner with the
same curiosity you had right at the very
beginning okay relationship challenge
number 10 is going to feel ironic at
this point in the video after we have
spent the past nine points talking about
what the infp really struggles with and
might accidentally get wrong in the
relationship but this one is over
assuming responsibility for everything
that goes wrong now because infps are
very self-aware they spend a lot of time
observing their own psyche that's kind
of their superpower right it's really
getting to understand their own minds
they can over assume responsibility for
everything that happens in their
relationship so anytime something goes
wrong or anytime there is a problem they
can spend so much time analyzing their
own role in it and trying to figure out
where they went wrong or where they
didn't necessarily say or do the right
thing that they can actually lose sight
of the very real things that their
partner might be doing wrong and they
can over assume responsibility for the
problems in their relationship when what
they really need to be doing is
interpersonally working those things out
it actually feels a lot more comfortable
for a lot of infps to decide everything
is a me problem so that i can just fix
it internally without having to do that
interpersonal repair work in the real
world and they can default to that
method of problem solving of just
adjusting and adjusting and adjusting
the self to the scenario instead of
realizing sometimes the scenario needs
adjusting right sometimes the other
person is at least partially at fault
here and this problem needs to be worked
out between us
not just internally inside of my own
mind so as much as it's good to be aware
of all of these challenges and all of
these potential pitfalls or mistakes
that you might make within a
relationship it's also super important
to be aware of what is not yours to own
okay and what you really do need to work
out between you and the other person and
what requires a little bit of their
participation as well if not a lot of
their participation be aware of this
when you're single be aware of this in
the dating phase and be especially aware
of this in long-term relationships where
really big problems can crop up and
where they will only get worse and worse
and worse if they require the other
person's participation to solve but
you're not offering the other person the
opportunity to participate in that
problem-solving process right it is a
loving thing to work out relationship
problems between the two of you rather
than just thinking you can deal with
everything on your own all right i think
that is all that i have to say today
about infps and relationship struggles
but as always let me know in the comment
which of these let me know in the
comments which of these really resonated
for you which ones would you add to this
list if you had anything that you think
is a really major challenge or struggle
you go through that you didn't hear me
talk about here and let's just do as
much supporting of each other as we can
because relationships are really hard
and the more we can share about what
works and what doesn't work for us the
better the better that it gets for all
of us so thank you so much for watching
this reminder that i do run a six week
infp soul boot camp course which you can
find on my website at www.heidipreeb.com
i will link it in the description below
and if you are an infp and you want to
see more videos about infps let me know
what you want to see made and i am more
than happy to do what i can to make that
happen alright i love you guys thanks so
much for watching and i will see you
back here again soon
[Music]
you