hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here this month on this
channel we're going to be talking about
heartbreak and when I say heartbreak I
don't just mean the pain of a romantic
relationship ending Hearts can break in
all sorts of different ways for all
sorts of different reasons but today we
actually are going to be talking about
the pain of a romantic relationship
ending now the reason I wanted to make
this video a video about what to do when
you find yourself in the place of
knowing that you should or want to leave
the Romantic relationship that you're in
but you can't seem to take that leap
because you feel too attached is kind of
twofold so one this is a video that I
desperately wish that I had at various
points in my attachment healing Journey
but also in part this is a response to a
very specific type of comment that I
frequently see getting left on both my
videos or kind of similar videos in the
space of relationship healing which is
anything along the lines of what do I do
if I want to internalize this stuff and
I want to work to have a healthier or
more communicative relationship or
whatever it is but my partner has
absolutely no interest in joining me on
that essentially how do I get someone
else to care about me to take my needs
seriously and to work with me on
changing our relationship Dynamic and I
think the kind of go-to response that
people tend to get in that situation is
well maybe that's a person that it's not
going to be possible for you to have a
healthy relationship with maybe that's a
relationship that you should leave
because these types of skills and tools
and practices only really work if both
people are committed to making a change
and well that might be the truth and in
fact I believe it usually is you can't
make any sort of substantial relational
change if only one person is bought into
it it still does not mean that that's an
easy thing to do so to me it always
feels a little bit dismissive when
someone is coming in and going hey I'm
so motivated to work on all of this
stuff but the other person in the
relationship is not to just tell that
person well get out of that relationship
because I know firsthand that there are
situations we can get into in life in
relationships where someone's saying
just leave the relationship feels kind
of like them saying just saw your own
leg off right it's not an easy thing to
do because so many other parts of our
lives and our self-concepts can get
baked into really unhealthy relationship
Dynamics and then it feels like we're
going to be losing an unbearable amount
of ourselves or our resource if we're to
leave that person and of course that's
not what we want right we don't want to
be in the position where our
relationships are providing us with so
much of our sense of self or so much of
our connection to the world or to other
people that leaving them feels like
sawing our own legs off but sometimes
that's a situation we find ourselves in
so what we're going to do with this
video is do a really deep breakdown get
really granular about all of the things
that tend to get tied up in
relationships that make it feel hard to
leave them and then we're going to talk
about how we can start to strengthen or
work slowly on each of those areas to
bring ourselves to a place where if what
we have already decided in our minds and
our hearts is that we want to leave the
relationship it feels relatively easy to
do that now of course leaving any
relationship especially a romantic
relationship especially a long-term
romantic relationship is never going to
feel painless but what we're trying to
do here is get the pain to a level where
it feels manageable so we're going to
look not at should I stay or should I go
but at the question of if I know in my
gut I should or I want to go but I just
cannot bring myself to do it why can I
not bring myself to do it what's
unconsciously operating for me that's
keeping me in this and what would I have
to do in order to get to a place where
leaving feels bearable this is about to
be a bit of a graphic metaphor but
there's a movie that came out several
years ago called called 127 Hours that's
the true story of a guy who got stuck in
I believe it was a canyon when he was
doing some sort of outdoor Sport and his
arm was trapped under this Boulder and
he stayed there for 127 Hours waiting to
see if he was going to get rescued and
eventually he realized the only way to
free himself was to amputate his arm and
so this movie which is based on a real
story that happened kind of moves us
through this mental process that this
man goes through where he eventually
realizes I have to get rid of this thing
that I once thought was absolutely vital
and I would never consider getting rid
of in order to save myself how do I find
a way to do this and I apologize for the
kind of mental image that that occr but
what I want to track this with is the
idea that when we end up in these
relationships that are deadening our
Spirits there's something about the way
we're showing up in the relationship
that feels like a deep self abandonment
it's kind of like your inner child has
their arm stuck under a boulder and that
inner child is losing energy they're
losing their livelihood their creativity
their Jah de vivra they're losing their
hope and their optimism the longer we
stay trapped under that Boulder and so
this video is essentially about how to
safely do that amputation to cut off
that part of your inner child's
dependency on someone else in order to
save their their life and this is going
to hurt immensely in the short run right
when that guy was amputating his own arm
it was not a pleasant experience and I
will bet you any money the recovery was
also not a pleasant experience but he
lived and he's still here today to tell
that tale and this is the same principle
we need to apply in situations where our
inner children so the parts of ourselves
that are young and emotional get ATT
attached to a situation or a person or a
relationship that is in part draining
their life force we as our adult selves
have to make the decision do I cause
this child immense pain in the short
term in order for them to eventually
make a recovery and get that healthy
Emotional Self back online or do I leave
them stuck under this Boulder and let
them die there what it means when we let
our inner children die is often a deep
sense of depression a feeling of Our
Lives ceasing to matter or of the
decisions that we make in our lives
ceasing to have importance to ourselves
or to the world or to other people and
this is not saying that it's the other
person's fault if this is happening very
often with insecurely attached
relationships in particular both people
are coming in with a set of norms and
beliefs around relationships that are
actually quite damaging to themselves
but it's just what they learned about
what love looks like so this is not to
say that it's the other person's fault
fault necessarily if you're feeling like
this it could be that your patterning
and the things that you've internalized
about relationships are causing you to
consistently choose Partners you are not
compatible with or who you don't have
shared values with or whatever it is and
that alone even if the other person and
yourself are completely well-meaning is
enough to slowly drain your life force
over time so what we're talking about
today is how to safely do that emotional
amputation if you have already decided
that it needs to be done and we're going
to talk about this in Three Steps step
one in this process is contextualizing
the situation properly for yourself so I
think that a lot of people particularly
those who have insecure attachment
Styles or early relational wounds that
may have grown into something like
complex PTSD stay in relationships that
they know they ought to or want to be
out of because they're expecting the
regular relationship adages and the
regular breakup advice that they see out
in the world to apply to their situation
so if I have this story in my head
because I am basing my idea of what a
breakup looks like on a secure
relationship that I should feel totally
confident that I should be in a shared
reality with my partner by the time we
part ways and that I should feel kind of
happy and good about my decision when
I'm leaving I'm probably never going to
reach that point if my relationship is
not a secure one
insecurely attached relationships and
secure relationships function in
fundamentally different ways okay and if
we are expecting the breakup of an
insecure relationship to look and feel
like the breakup of a secure
relationship we are probably going to
end up staying in our situation forever
because it might never get to the point
where we feel calm clearheaded and good
about moving on from it so the two kind
of Main reasons why insecure breakups
are different than secure breakups is
because one if you are insecurely
attached it's highly likely that you are
lacking a lot of invisible resource that
helps secure people through their
breakups and when I say invisible
resource I mean things like self-esteem
so a sense of I am still a good
worthwhile lovable person when I step
out of this relationship or mental and
emotional stability there are all of
these things that people who air more
secure kind of take for granted when
they get out of a relationship that help
them to process it in a clean way that
are not necessarily available to those
who air more insecurely attached and the
second reason it tends to be harder for
people in insecurely attach
relationships to leave them are because
it's highly likely that if you are not
secure you are also dating another
person who is not secure and if that
other person is not secure it means that
you're going to be dealing with extra
Che challenge around getting in a shared
reality about a breakup so let's say
you're dating someone who's super
anxious and you might feel like to me
it's very clear that this relationship
is not working or it's dysfunctional or
whatever it is but they don't want to
look at that and they're going to keep
insisting no this is true love right
true love means just persisting through
all of this so they might have a kind of
warped idea of what a relationship looks
like same goes if you have a more
dismissing partner so let's say you're
struggling with really not getting the
support that you need out of the
relationship or the emotional intimacy
but your partner is continuously
insisting no this is a perfectly normal
relationship you're just wanting too
much connection or too much intimacy
because their model of a healthy
relationship is very different from your
model but both of these things are going
to make it extra challenging to decide
when to end the relationship because in
a secure relationship people tend to
have more similar values and
expectations for the relationship and
there's usually a much higher degree of
agreement on whether or not the
relationship is working and whether or
not each person's needs are getting
properly met so if things feel weird and
off for one person in the relationship
there's a very high chance in a secure
Dynamic that things also feel weird and
off for the other person whereas in
insecure Dynamics you can have the total
opposite you can have one person who
feels completely satisfied and wants to
argue that there's nothing wrong with
the relationship while the other person
is absolutely suffering chronically so
this leads us to the first point about
what's different from a secure or what
I'm going to call a simple breakup from
an insecure or a more complex breakup
when a relationship is comprised of two
secure people generally by the time
you're approaching a breakup it's coming
from a relatively conscious and
integrated place again because secure
people are making relatively few
distortions there's generally going to
be pretty clear clear and pretty
explicit conversations throughout the
relationship about what each person's
expectations are and so if they get to a
place where a breakup is looming it's
often because they've had these
conversations over and over again where
they're coming towards this shared
awareness that there's just some big
value that one of us holds that the
other one doesn't or there's just
different things that we want out of our
relationship with each other or there's
different ways we want to live our lives
or raise children or whatever it is and
so it's going to be pretty clear
why the breakup is happening to both
people that does not mean it will not be
incredibly painful because they might
miss each other terribly but it does
mean that they can rest easy knowing
that they made the right choice because
they truly and honestly explored various
options and were honest with each other
about what was and was not going to work
so it might be really sad to learn that
they want different things or that
they're not compatible in certain ways
but it's going to be easy to understand
now contrast this with an insecure
attachment relationship in which case
relationships often end based on an
unintegrated decision to be insecurely
attached means to be relating to other
people through unconscious strategy and
when we are relating to other people
through strategy it means we are
necessarily whether we mean to be doing
this or not not being completely honest
about what all of our needs and values
and expectations are
and that might be because not all of
those things are even conscious to us so
we might not know why it is that we feel
so chronically frustrated with our
partner or why it is that we can't seem
to leave even though we think that we
should there are parts of ourselves that
we have hidden from ourselves which
means we can't really integrate them
clearly into our decision-making and if
our partner is insecurely attached and
also operating from a different strategy
it means they too have needs wants
values whatever it is that they have
hidden from themselves that might come
out unconsciously in their behaviors but
that they're not able to be clear and
direct with us about so often it feels
really confusing trying to figure out if
you should stay or go in a relationship
where both people are insecurely
attached because what you'll often have
is one or in most cases both Partners
acting in ways that differ wildly from
what their stated wants needs and value
values are you might have someone
telling you yeah I really want let's say
a long-term commitment I want to start a
family whatever it is but their actions
do not match that at all and that can be
really challenging to integrate because
you have to go do I stick with this part
of me that wants those things and the
part of them that is telling me they
want it or do I really look at the
behavior that's happening here which
points me towards the opposite thing
being true or you might have an anxious
leaning partner who just tells you over
and over again that you are their
favorite person in the world that they
can't imagine life without you but it
also feels like they're chronically kind
of angry at you or actually really
displeased with your priorities and
values that they're claiming they like
so it can be really confusing trying to
figure out whether to stay or go in a
relationship where both your actions and
the other person's actions do not align
with their stated values needs
expectations for the relationship this
can make it really challenging to reach
an integrated decision which leads us to
our next problem when secure people or
people having what I call a simple
breakup exit the relationship they have
a very clear and coherent narrative
about why it happened so it's also not
particularly difficult for them to go to
friends and family members explain the
entire spectrum of what happened so I
really love this person I really wanted
to be with them but it turned out we
just weren't compatible in these ways or
it turned out we just didn't want the
same things or I wasn't happy in X Y or
Z ways I never really felt fully seen
and fully understood by the other person
whatever it is there's usually a very
balanced view of it that they're able to
give their friends and family members
which leads to really deep accurate
mirroring and that co-regulation that
ability to go to other people and have
our pain be seen accurately is
incredibly important in the healing
process CU it kind of reminds us okay
I'm all right there are other people in
the world who understand me and commere
me back to myself and so it takes a
little bit of that anxiety away from the
experience of leaving someone else who
we felt knew us really deeply in that
scenario it's very easy for our friends
and families to understand something
like I really miss this person even
though I know it was best for me to them
right because we've given them all the
information that helps them understand
both what we're sad about and why we
decided that this was the best choice
anyways now contrast this with an
insecure or more complex breakup when
our attachment styles are not secure by
definition what we are doing is
distorting our experience in some way so
that often leads us with an unintegrated
or unclear representation of the
relationship itself and that makes it
really challenging for us to give the
right information to other people to
allow them to mirror us back to
ourselves clearly our attachment systems
which include the distortions that they
lead us to make are the most online when
we are under distress and breakups tend
to be highly distressing experiences so
if you air more avoidant and you're
going through a breakup what's likely to
come online is the part of you that
finds a way to write the experience off
as
unimportant and if that's what you're
communicating to the people around you I
went through this breakup but it's for
the best I feel great and that might be
true and authentic to what you do feel
at the moment what's not being mirrored
back to you is the pain and the sadness
that you're experiencing
unconsciously and the same is true in
the opposite direction if you are
anxious and you go through a breakup
what's going to come online is the part
of you that either idealizes or
villainized of your relationship you
idealize this person and let all your
friends know about them in an extremely
positive way when in reality there was a
lot of things that weren't working
inside of the relationship the people
around you might have no idea of that so
they're not able to give you true
mirroring about what was actually there
inside of the relationship the way that
it was getting mirrored for you while
you were in it and the same is true if
you were chronically villainizing your
partner inside of the relationship or
after leaving your friends and family
are going to kind of have this idea of
your partner that's very negative and
they might not understand why you miss
them so much or you might have too much
pride to admit that you do miss them
immensely even though there were a lot
of things that you were very angry about
and again when we have a secure
worldview we're able to hold conflicting
feelings inside of a larger picture so
we're able to see other people as
nuanced and multifaceted so I really
love this person but they really drove
me crazy in this way right and we're
able to give someone all of that in an
integrated way when we are not securely
attached it can be really difficult to
hold conflicting ideas about one person
in our mind simultaneously so you
portray them to others in a very black
or white way and then don't get the full
spectrum of your feelings mirrored back
to you this leads to unsatisfying
co-regulation because you're unable to
explain the full Nuance of the situation
to other people so it can start to feel
like the only other person who's capable
of understanding the relationship I was
in was this other person who was in it
with me because that might literally be
true if both of you are kind of
defaulting to Black or White thinking
about it it's going to be hard to feel
seen by other people which is going to
not give you that deep level of
co-regulation that really does help when
we're experiencing heartbreak to take
the situation to other people and have
our pain and our anger and our hope and
everything in between mirrored back to
us by the people around us when all of
that does happen and we're able to see
the bigger picture in our breakups it
leads to a very clean sense of grief so
what I mean by that is that when we are
grieving a secure relationship breakup
it often feels incred challenging
emotionally but we're also very
understanding of why that challenge is
happening so while we're crying while
we're grieving while we're raging
whatever it is we also have this very
strong sense of I know why I'm going
through this right I'm aware that my
feelings are hurt but I'm not internally
conflicted about what to do I'm not
second guessing myself over and over and
over again about whether or not I should
have left that relationship I'm not
thinking what if I tried this strategy
or that strategy because I wasn't
operating based on strategy I laid all
my cards on the table I used the truth
to navigate this relationship and the
truth was that we weren't compatible or
it didn't work out so now all there is
left to do is feel the feelings
associated with losing somebody and with
getting kind of unused to somebody right
someone I was used to co-regulating with
and going to for lots of things is no
longer here and that hurts
but it's the kind of grief that time
actually does authentically heal when
you have insecure or complex breakups
what you often have is complicated grief
grief that kind of sneaks out of nowhere
grief that hits you in areas where you
weren't expecting it because again if
your and or the other person's
attachment strategies were keeping you
from having a fairly clear and
uncomplicated view of the relationship
there's probably going to be a lot of
second guessing and being unclear about
whether or not you made the right
decision and because you're unclear on
that you might feel like you almost want
to leave a little Part of Yourself
inside of the relationship emotionally
just in case you actually do want to go
back or you might think to yourself what
if I had tried saying or doing this what
if I'd kind of tried to play my cards in
this way then what would have happened
because again when we're operating from
strategy there are always about 100
other strategies we could have tried out
which makes it feel really hard to leave
a relationship because we might think in
our minds well what if I said this what
if IID tried this what if I'd made this
adjustment as opposed to when we are
just laying our cards on the table and
being really clear with each other about
what's going to work and what's not we
aren't left with all of this second
guessing because we saw all of the cards
we knew what we could or couldn't make
of them and then it feels easier to move
on now the reason we talk about all of
this is not to make it feel hopeless if
you are insecurely attached and wanting
to leave a relationship why we talk
about this is because it's going to be
very difficult and in a lot of cases
very shame inducing if you are comparing
a complex breakup to a simple one and
feeling like you are absolutely crazy
for not being able to feel those very
simple clean emotions that more secure
people feel when they leave a
relationship or if you feel like you
can't seem to explain the relationship
or why you left it in a way that makes
sense to other people
that actually is normal for an
insecurely attached breakup which is
just to say if you are waiting for your
relationship to become very simple and
feel clean and easy to leave it's highly
likely you're going to stay in it for
much much longer if not forever because
it might never get to that place so at a
certain point that inconsistency or that
confusion or that sense of this person
is telling me what I want to hear but
they're not walking the walk those
things need be taken as data points in
and of themselves right in a secure
relationship I want to feel like my
partner's words and their actions line
up in a secure relationship I want to
feel like when I'm honest that gives us
the best chance at working through
issues so again at a certain point those
inconsistencies or that need to be in
strategy for things to work out can
actually be a data point that this
relationship is not necessarily ever
going to function under healthy
principles
and then the decision you're faced with
is do I want a relationship that
functions under healthy principles or
not this leads us to step two step two
is once again what we want to start
looking at when we've already made that
decision yes I want to leave but I don't
know how to do it or for some reason I
just feel like my emotional system will
not allow me to detach from this
relationship step two is all about
unearthing what is keeping us
unconsciously stuck inside of this
relationship the stuff that is keeping
you stuck is whatever is unconsciously
preventing you from leaving the
relationship despite you having a
conscious desire to do so I remember
reading this book one time called why we
change and 10 reasons why we don't by
Ross alen horn it is truly one of the
best books I've ever read on
decisionmaking where he talks about the
fact that often when we find it really
hard to make a change in our lives it's
because we have not gotten super
explicit with ourselves about what we
would be giving up in order to make that
change that we are currently taking for
granted and if we were to make all of
that stuff conscious and understand how
to get those needs that we're not
necessarily noticing are being met
through a relationship or whatever it is
if we could find a way to get them met
in new ways then the change would become
completely natural it would be easier to
make it than to not make it and so
that's what we're going to talk about
with this step we're going to look at
what types of invisible resources we're
often getting out of relationships
including relationships that we
consciously believe we do not want to be
in then we're going to talk about how we
can start strengthening those areas of
our lives in ways that do not rely upon
the relationship so that eventually we
get to a place where it feels easy to
leave the relationship if that is what
we want to do so I know earlier we were
playing with the metaphor of amputating
a body part in this part of the video I
want to play with a different metaphor
which is just imagining that this
heartbreak you're going to go through if
you leave this relationship is kind of
like an injury often when we have an
injury in the body it does heal with
time but what we don't always do is
Target the injury itself if we're let's
say going to physiotherapy what we often
do is try to strengthen the muscles
around the part of the body that is
injured so that we're not putting too
much stress on the injured part itself
and that's what I want to encourage us
to start thinking about because to leave
a relationship that is giving us a lot
of what we want in terms of our romantic
needs what we're doing is kind of
injuring ourselves short term and that
is true whether we are secure or
insecure but the way that we do that
without falling apart is we work on
strengthening all of the other areas in
our lives so that they are strong enough
to support us through that emotional
injury so we're going to look at some
different parts of our lives that we
might be neglecting without realizing it
or Outsourcing to our relationship
without realizing it so at the center of
this graph just to make things super
clear from the get-go we're going to
look at connection to partner and this
is the area that we are going to
intentionally be injuring if we leave a
relationship so our connection to
partner is often meeting a lot of
emotional intimacy needs it's often
meeting a lot of sexual intimacy needs
it's often meeting a lot of needs around
kind of co-creating or planning a future
with someone and it's often meeting a
lot of our romantic needs however we
Define that for ourselves now the kind
of love addict approach to ending a
relationship is to over rely on
connection to partner to meet a lot of
their other needs so all of the muscles
around this one for someone who might be
more love addicted are likely being
quite neglected so what they're going to
do is Target this muscle specifically
and go well I can't leave this part of
my life unattended because if so I'll
just be weak overall so I need to find a
different partner before I leave my
current relationship either to already
date or to have kind of lined up so that
this muscle is never left weakened but
this creates a whole host of other
problems so what we want to start
looking at is how do we allow this
muscle to take a hit and trust that it
will be absorbed by everything
surrounding it the the first thing we
want to look at is connection to self
when we really love and Trust ourselves
and value our own competence and our own
compassion our relationship with
ourselves serves as a very strong
resource when we leave romantic
relationships but if we are Outsourcing
a lot of our sense of self to the
relationship what happens is that we
start to worry if I leave this
relationship I'm going to lose a really
strong connection to a part of myself
that I believe can only be alive through
this
relationship the question we want to be
asking ourselves here if we want to
start strengthening this area is if I
leave this relationship in what ways am
I going to self abandon so maybe when I
am in a romantic relationship I tell
myself I'm a good worthy lovable person
but as soon as I'm not in a relationship
I tell myself I'm an unworthy unlovable
person I'm now aband in the part of
myself that I was allowing myself to
keep online in that relationship which
is the belief that I am lovable and
worthwhile and a good person and I'm
taking that away from myself we might
need to do some strengthening in the
area of self-regard before leaving the
relationship so that we know even if
this person is no longer in my life
anymore I'm not going to kick myself off
my own team because they're gone I'm
going to keep on believing that I am
worthy and lovable or whatever it is
that I believed by virtue of being in a
partnership with this person my
self-concept holds true another thing we
might want to look at particularly if we
have any codependency online is what
parts of myself am I trying to heal or
stay in connection with through this
other person so let's say I don't really
care about my own health or well-being
but I'm really fixated on my partner's
well-being what I'm doing in that case
is just projecting the part of myself
that I know needs to be tended to and
cared for onto someone else because it's
not threatening for me to see someone
else as vulnerable and in need but it is
threatening for me to see myself as
vulnerable and in need so if I want to
be able to leave that relationship
without feeling unbelievable guilt what
I'm going to need to do is re
internalize that part of myself that
knows that I need that same type of care
and nurturance and tending to that I'm
telling myself other people Des need
from me so a lot of this process is the
process of realizing what have I allowed
to come alive inside of myself which
energies are kind of online in me when
I'm with this other person and how am I
going to find a way to keep those
energies online whether they're positive
things or whether they're problems that
I'm trying to solve how do I keep in
connection with all of that once I leave
this relationship and until we have a
clear answer to that and we've given
ourselves some proof that we are going
to to nurture those things and ourselves
outside of the relationship it's going
to be really hard to feel like we want
to leave the next thing we're going to
look at and we're going to move pretty
quickly through this because I think
it's one that is generally fairly
conscious for people is connection to
Resource and when I say resource here
I'm talking about the more overt forms
of resource like money and shelter and
practical stability these are areas
particularly in long-term relationships
that do get disrupted when we leave them
so what we just want to be making sure
of here is that we have a concrete plan
if this is let's say someone we have
combined our finances with or who we
live with of how we are going to sustain
ourselves on a practical level once
we've left the relationship and if we
don't have a clear answer for that what
we might need to do is just spend some
time getting our decks in a row and
making that a really big priority for a
while so that we know I'll be able to
transition out of this relationship
without completely destabilizing myself
on a practical level the next thing
we're going to look at is connection to
social networks so do you have emotional
intimacy with people outside of your
partnership do you have friends you can
turn to family members either blood
family or chosen family who you know you
can rely on to have your back during the
kind of Messier more human moments that
you're going to go through during a
breakup or you need someone to talk to
until the we hours of the morning or
when you need to be checked because
you're pretending the relationship and
the breakup means nothing to you but the
people who love you know that that's not
necessarily true so this is often the
type of support that we get through
friends and Community but if those
things are not available to you it might
be worth looking at whether you can get
a counselor for a period of time while
you're preparing to leave this
relationship or someone else who you can
trust to co-regulate with you in a way
that is relatively undistorted so
they're getting that full picture of
things and helping you make integrated
decisions
or if there's existing social
relationships that you've been
neglecting that it might be time to go
back and strengthen and ideally we don't
want to be doing this in a transactional
way right like oh I'm going to be going
through a breakup so it's time to
reconnect to my friends so I can lean on
them for a while until I get back into
the next relationship what we want to be
doing here is building a consistent
social network so that this muscle
always stays strong because if this
muscle is strong in your next
relationship you get into this is going
to help hold you up even in short-term
instances like you and your partner are
in a fight or you and your partner are
struggling in your relationship in some
way you're not going to feel like this
relationship is my only chance at
intimacy or connection it's the only way
I can have that need fulfill this is
about dispersing that need in a wider
way so that it doesn't feel threatening
to take a step back temporarily or
permanently L when that's the healthiest
thing for us to do either for ourselves
or for the relationship itself CU even
in the healthiest relationship people
need space people need to take time
apart from their Partners they need to
be able to go co-regulate with other
people and get a more well-rounded view
of themselves and their relationship
reflected back to them right so this is
something that as much as possible we
want to keep alive all of the time but
we particularly just want to keep an eye
on it if we're feeling like leaving a
relationship is going to mean losing
touch with the part of ourselves that is
in Intimate connection with other people
period being seen and understood deeply
is a human need and if we feel like we
are only getting that met in one
capacity it's going to be really really
hard to let that go and this leads us to
the last resource I want to look at
today which is connection to purpose so
do we feel like there is a reason why we
need to stay healthy and to care about
ourselves when we have a sense of
purpose a sense of my life matters in a
way that is bigger than me we end up
kind of caring about our own well-being
as a product of that because if I feel
like the only point of life is to enjoy
myself and have a good time I'm just
going to follow whatever whims I have
and leave whatever situation is no
longer making me happy or I'm going to
persist way too long at situations that
once made me happy but are now kind of
making other areas of my life
unmanageable when we feel like we have
some sort of drive or purpose or meaning
in our life we have to take our own
well-being and our own mental and
emotional and physical health seriously
because we matter to other people so
caring for ourselves is no longer just a
personal issue and I think that this is
at its core the thing that is really
missing most most of the time when we
get stuck in these situations where we
know we should leave something but we
can't we don't have a sense that we
matter in a deep way to the world or to
other people and so we're not
necessarily looking at caring for
ourselves as an act of social
responsibility when we start looking at
it that way we start to naturally think
about okay what resources both socially
and practically and emotionally do I
need to keep myself feeling okay so it
becomes intuitive to start strengthening
those muscles as a regular part of our
mental health regime when we don't feel
like our lives matter or have any
purpose or value it's really easy to
neglect all of the rest of this and so
often what we need to do in these
situations where we find it really hard
to leave something that we kind of know
we want to is do some soul searching and
really get in touch with what is the
bigger fish that I want to fry here how
could I contribute to the world or my
community or other people in a way that
makes it imperative for me to care about
myself and in a way that is going to
cause me to deliberately choose romantic
relationships where I feel supported and
where I feel like the relationship is
healthy and adding stability to my life
rather than the opposite having a sense
of purpose helps keep the rest of our
life and our relationships in
perspective and of course it's not as
easy is just deciding to have meaning or
purpose one day when you wake up right
but it's worth noting that if that's an
area of your life that you have
neglected if you have not spent a lot of
time really getting clear with yourself
on who am I and in what ways do I want
to contribute to the world it's probably
going to start causing a lot of problems
in a lot of other areas and so this
might be the question that you want to
spend the most time with how do I want
to give back what do I want to do with
my life what is going to make me feel
like my time on this Earth matters in
our physical bodies we have big muscles
and we have smaller muscles and a sense
of purpose in our emotional body is a
really big muscle group if it's weak
targeting the smaller muscles around it
is not going to get you anywhere close
to as far as strengthening this muscle
is so as we look at all of these
different areas I just want you to
really notice and pay attention to which
of these things do I kind of project
onto my partnership or which of these
things have gotten in meshed with my
partnership and I don't want you to
shame yourself in this process right
that's the opposite of the idea here
what we just want to do is really look
at am I getting most of my social needs
met through my partner has my sense of
purpose in life become very intertwined
with my partner and that might not be
the most unhealthy thing right often if
we have a family with someone or we
combine our lives in major practical
ways it's natural for those areas to be
fairly intertwined so the reason we want
to look at all of this is just because
we want to get clear on what are we
going to have to start separating out
and strengthening individually as
opposed to doing overall conditioning
which is what we may be used to do if
we've been in this partnership for a
long time so if my social network is
super intertwined with my partners how
do I just start separating that out more
and more if I'm financially dependent on
my partner how do I work on becoming
more financially inde dependent if my
sense of purpose in life is very
intertwined with my partner how do I
separate that out a little bit and
figure out what parts of that mission or
that purpose I can keep working on
independently and what parts I'm going
to have to grieve as part of the
relationship if I walk away from it and
again we want to spend a lot of time on
that question in what ways am I likely
to self- abandon if I leave this
relationship and how do I find ways to
keep in connection with the parts of
myself that currently only feel alive
when I'm around this other person this
leads us to step three which is much
less technical step three is making that
hard decision to hurt your own feelings
so deciding now that I've done all of
this work to get clear on how I can step
outside of this relationship without
bleeding out emotionally making the
decision to do that and thinking about
how to maintain your sense of well-being
when you have done that there is no
version of this where this step is
painless just like that man amputating
his own arm hurt like hell this is
highly likely to hurt like hell you just
need to be able to trust yourself enough
to inflict what you know to be necessary
short-term pain upon yourself
essentially what we're looking at here
is how do we make a recovery plan for
ourselves before we leave the
relationship and we want to make sure
that we're targeting all of those areas
that are generally invisible to us so
everything that we talked about in step
two to make sure that we are keeping
those areas strong after the breakup
happens so do we have a plan for how we
will nurture our connection to self in
the moments where we feel like we are
self- abandoning do we have a strategy
in place maybe someone we can call or an
activity we can do that will reconnect
us to oursel and allow us to nurture the
parts of ourselves that were once being
nurtured in the relationship
once we have left it do we have a social
network or other people in our Lives who
we are intentionally and deliberately
nurturing our relationships with even on
the days when we feel like garbage and
don't want to go anywhere do we have a
sense of purpose and meaning in our
lives do we have something that gets us
out of bed in the morning that we are
willing to get out of bed in the morning
for even when we are absolutely
heartbroken and in a lot of ways we're
going to have to be strict with
ourselves elves in this process it's
kind of like with literal weight
training once you've done it for long
enough picking up certain weights feels
easy but then if you stop for a long
time and you go to pick up the same
amount of weight it's going to feel
incredibly heavy you might even injure
yourself trying to lift it and it's
really going to put into perspective
just how fit you were back when that
thing felt easy to do so if you have
been nurturing all of these different
areas of your life and it feels like you
want to start letting some of them slide
because you're in so much pain after
this heartbreak well it's of course good
to give yourself some leniency and some
time to be in grief and pain we want to
make sure we're not completely
neglecting the regimes that have brought
us to the place where we are strong
enough to make this decision for
ourselves in the first place so we need
diligent and holistic emotional strength
training practices that we stick to when
we are heartbroken and what we want to
do is make sure that we are planning in
our more integrated moments so the
moments where it feels like we see the
situation more clearly we understand
that leaving this relationship is going
to hurt but it's going to be worth it
those are the places we want to make our
plans from we don't want to make plans
about leaving the relationship when we
are in a blind rage at our partner we
don't want to make plans about leaving
the relationship when we are feeling
super triggered into anxious wounding
and it feels like nothing is ever going
to be okay again if we leave we want to
be making plans from our most resourced
state so if you can let's say hire a
coach or a therapist or someone who can
sit with you and help you stay in that
resourced state when you're thinking
about leaving these are the places where
we want to build our plans from when I
was in the thick of my own attachment
wounding was fearful avoidant it meant
that I was often only really looking at
either the logic of the situation or the
emotion involved in a situation at a
given point in time so I would let all
of my feelings do the decision- making
and then I would get into a deactivated
State and see all of the things that
didn't make sense and then make a
different decision about the
relationship and kind of Ricochet back
and forth between those States and as I
was earning my way towards secure
attachment the last breakup I had where
I was still pretty fairly entrenched in
my fearful avoidant patterning I wrote a
letter to myself on a day when I was
feeling more secure than not that was
just ackn knowledging hey you're
probably going to have a day where you
are feeling overwhelmed with emotion and
where you are remembering all of the
positive parts of the relationship and
all of the ways in which you miss that
person and I want you to know that all
of those feelings are real you really
did love them you really did have a deep
special emotional connection with them
they really were a truly wonderful
person in all of these ways and I hope
you find a way to keep treasuring that
but that was not enough to make the
relationship work in a long-term way and
the fact that these practical things or
these unaligned values were there and
you loved them so much was precisely
what made it so hard to leave but now I
need you to be in your integrated self
and be able to hold both all of the very
real emotions that you're feeling right
now and the logic of why we can't go
back on our decision because of those
emotions so whatever it is that you
think you are going to potentially fall
prey to after you leave the relationship
whatever you think might suck you back
in maybe it's going to be that person
reaching out to you and expressing
either apology or distress maybe it's
going to be feeling insecure maybe it's
going to be feeling guilty try to plan
for what you're going to need when that
arises what are you going to need to
remember if you are feeling overwhelming
guilt or overwhelming confusion and
distress in your more grounded and more
integrated moments plan for that write
yourself letters to read in the future
talk to your family and friends about
the distortions that you know you start
making in your own mind when your
attachment patterning comes online ask
them if they're willing to lovingly
check you and help keep you in reality
and if there are people you trust like a
therapist or a close friend it might not
hurt to ask them where do you think I
might get stuck and how do you think I
might be able to plan ahead for that and
this kind of leads to the last point I
want to make about all of this which is
that at the end of the day what we want
to treat all of this as is an
opportunity to practice wholeness so
again to be insecurely attached or to
have early wounding often means that we
try to put everything into black or
white categories because that was once
adaptive but feelings and relationships
and experience of being human as a
relationship ends is one giant gray area
and so anytime a conflicting feeling
comes up or something unexpected arises
in your awareness maybe you feel regret
where you thought you'd feel hope or
grief in an area where two days ago you
felt Joy it's just the opportunity for
you to start mapping that gray area in a
way that allows you to understand it
better because everything that comes up
after a heartbreak and inside of a
heartbreak is an authentic part of your
experience and if you can stay on the
page with as much of it as possible and
learn to just watch it and get to know
it and listen to it which is what we're
going to talk about in some of the
videos that are coming up you're going
to learn an immense amount about
yourself and about your values and about
your ability to be in relationship with
other people so instead of beating
yourself up every time you feel
something that seemingly conflicts with
what you thought you would feel or what
you wanted to feel instead can you stay
curious about it and can you allow that
to be a part of your experience as a
whole person who contains multitudes and
who is always learning what it's like to
be alive the more we're able to map out
that gray area accurately even if there
are things on it that we wish were not
on it right I really wish I didn't have
that feeling I really wish I didn't have
that impulse it's all a practice in
getting to know ourselves and when we
have a more accurate map of ourselves
we're able to better choose the roots
through our own experience of life that
maximize our own authenticity and
aliveness but it's really hard to do
that if we're denying major parts of our
experience so if we allow it to be
heartbreak can be an incredible
opportunity to get to know ourselves
much more deeply and being willing to
treat it as such such is exactly the
skill that is ultimately going to help
us find much more aligned relationships
that we can show up to in a much
healthier way the next time
around all right I think I'm going to
leave this at that for today as always
let me know what's coming up for you
guys as you've gone through this video
any thoughts feelings questions please
let me know in the comments below as
always I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and your inner
children even when it's really hard to
do that and each other and I will see
you back here again really
soon