hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about integrity and today in particular
we're going to look at what it means to
be in Integrity with ourselves when we
are either sharing vulnerably with
another person or receiving somebody
else's vulnerable sharing now the reason
I want to go over this is because ever
since vulnerability has become a big
movement in the past 10 years or so I
think that a lot of people have started
looking at it as a Magic Bullet like if
I can just be vulnerable with my partner
or my parents or my loved ones or
whoever it is then our relationship will
necessarily get better and if it doesn't
get better as a result it must mean that
there is something wrong or bad about
the other person and what I want to hone
in on today is first of all two
essential ingredients that I believe
need to be present in order for
vulnerability to bring people closer
together one or both of which are often
missing in scenarios where it feels like
vulnerability kind of backfires and
creates more conflict than it does
closeness as well as how people on both
ends of this spectrum can create an
environment where vulnerability is
likely to bring you closer together
rather than further apart so before we
dive into that I just want to quickly
Define what I mean when I say
vulnerability generally when I'm talking
about vulnerability what I mean is
sharing something with another other
person that you're maybe not done
processing yet so parts of yourself that
are in progress parts of yourself that
you feel unresolved on parts of yourself
that maybe feel a little bit
embarrassing or raw and that you
wouldn't generally want to share with a
lot of people and what this does what
vulnerability gives us the opportunity
to do in relationships is get closer to
each other by seeing each other more
clearly so if I am walking through my
life and having relationships with
people where I am withholding major
parts of who I am and what I think about
and struggle with on a daily basis I'm
probably not having many connections
that actually feel intimate so when I
want to get closer to someone what I
want to be doing in order to facilitate
that process is bringing more of myself
into the relationship and telling them
more about what it is in my life that
weighs really heavily on me right now or
that I don't necessarily have a solution
to at the moment and maybe I want to ask
for some feedback or advice on but in
order for this to go well and for us to
actually feel connected in this process
two things have to be at play one is
that I have to be sharing in a way that
is honest and congruent and not
motivated towards a certain end goal or
something that I want to get them to do
in response to me and two the person or
the environment receiving my
vulnerability has to be at least
relatively receptive and non-hostile so
we're going to look at what both both of
those conditions actually mean and we'll
start with the first one when we are
sharing our vulnerability honestly what
it means is that we are owning our own
experience which means we're not going
into the interaction thinking I hope the
other person responds to me in XY or Z
way and then if they don't respond to us
in that Way start thinking okay how do I
get them to care how do I retell this
story in a way that elicits the response
I want from them as soon as we're doing
that our center of gravity is moving
outside of ourselves so we are no longer
centered in our own integrity and the
connection that we have with ourselves
we are abandoning ourselves and trying
to get this other person to rescue us
from these uncomfortable feelings that
we're sharing with them and this is a
very subtle difference but a very
important one because I think that a lot
of us unconsciously mistake
vulnerability for the experience of
being rescued if we go into sharing
ourselves with someone expecting them to
take our pain away or to see how badly
we're hurting and fix it for us what we
are generally doing is pitching our pain
not sharing it at the exact volume that
it actually exists at and giving the
person the option to have whatever
response they authentically have to our
pain as soon as we are trying to
manipulate our experience in any way and
try to get the other person to give us a
response that might not be their honest
and genuine response we are no longer
being vulnerable we are being strategic
about trying to get what we want from
them but this is so hard to catch in the
moment it really is because a lot of us
are wired to naturally think about the
outcomes we want all of the time
generally this is kind of what it means
to be insecurely attached whereas to be
securely attached means that we exist in
a natural state of awareness about our
own vulnerabilities and we just see
sharing them with someone as giving
someone the opportunity to know us
better and get closer to us not giving
someone the opportunity to take our pain
away or rescue us from our pain because
we naturally understand that it's really
important for us to do those things for
ourselves and of course we can get
support we can get advice from other
people but we always stay centered in
knowing that our feelings and our
experiences are ours vulnerability is
just the act of sharing where we're at
honestly and directly and and giving
someone else the opportunity to respond
to that
honestly which leads us to the second
thing that it generally helps to have
present if you want to be drawn closer
to someone through vulnerable sharing
which is that the person or environment
receiving that vulnerable sharing has to
be receptive and open to it as opposed
to rejecting and critical of it so when
I was doing my Master's Degree I
actually did a research project on this
because I got got really hypee on the
idea that if people were just perfect in
the way that they expressed themselves
and the way that they shared their inner
worlds in an honest and owned way so
using ownership language rather than
projecting the way they're feeling onto
other people and criticizing them or
whatever it is I thought that as long as
people were presenting themselves
perfectly then it would naturally
improve relationships but what I found
is that there was another variable that
seemed equally as important which was
that the person receiving this honesty
had to be meeting it in a way that made
the other person feel safe enough to
continue sharing in that way and
generally what goes into that type of
safety are things like being curious
about someone's experience when they're
sharing openly and vulnerably with us
asking questions showing compassion for
their experiences and just generally
being willing to explore with someone
who is in a state of vulnerable sharing
and the opposite of this is also true
when we meet vulnerability with hos H
ility it causes future shutdowns in that
area and there's a pretty big range when
it comes to what hostility looks like so
this can be as overt as you sharing
something that's honest about yourself
with another person and them mocking or
insulting you based on what you've
shared or on the other end of this
spectrum it can look like someone who
just doesn't feel very comfortable
around vulnerability usually because
they weren't raised in environments
where it was received very well and so
you might get responses on this end of
the spectrum that are a little more
dissociative so the person's kind of
offering platitudes but not showing any
curiosity about your experience or
they're dissociating a little bit and
you can tell they're not really there
with you emotionally and on this end of
the scale we often have people who are
really well-meaning but just don't have
the skills that they need to receive
someone's vulnerability because they
never had their vulnerability received
so they don't really know how to do it
for other people but unfortunately both
ends of this spectrum have the capacity
to leave the person who is sharing in a
vulnerable and open way in a state of
shame because when we put ourselves out
there and we open up the door to let
someone in and see us for who we are it
hurts to be met with hostility or
indifference and there's a very subtle
message that can send that sharing who I
am is not
okay now if you are insecurely attached
it's probable that that is the message
you're going to internalize when you
share yourself vulnerably and the other
person does not resp respond in a way
that is curious or compassionate or warm
if you are securely attached there's a
much higher chance that you're not going
to take that personally and so what
we're going to look at now is how secure
people both practice vulnerability and
respond to it not being met with
compassion in a way that differentiates
the way they practice vulnerability
overall from the way they insecurely
attach people practice it the first
thing we really want to look at and hone
in on is that when securely attached
people practice vulnerability the number
one thing they are making sure of is
that the whole time they are staying
connected to their own integrity and
that their connection to their own
Integrity is being valued above their
connection to the other person so once
again if I am walking around the world
as a securely attached person who has
this internalized belief that who I am
and the feelings I have and the way I
experience the world is nothing to be
ashamed of then sharing themselves with
another person does not feel like this
Terror inducing event where they need
the other person to respond in a certain
way or else they're going to collapse
into shame they're just going to go I
want to get to know this person better
or I want to give them the opportunity
to know me better and so I'm going to
share parts of myself and I'm just going
to see if that interests the other
person and if it doesn't okay that means
the other person just maybe doesn't want
to be close to me in that way or maybe
they just don't want to have that type
of connection period and that doesn't
mean that there's anything wrong with
them or with me it's just not a great
match and what you'll notice is absent
from this worldview is that they're not
looking to the other person to regulate
them in some way so they're not going
into these vulnerable interactions going
I really need to get this person to see
how much I'm struggling because they're
not looking for that person to fix the
ways in which they're struggling even if
that other person was the one who caused
that pain which leads us to the second
thing that tends to be very different
when securely attached people are
practicing vulnerability than when
insecurely attached people are
practicing it which is that secure
people see their needs as relatively
flexible things and they have a lot of
different ways and strategies for
getting their needs met so when they're
sharing themselves honestly if another
person doesn't care or responds with
hostility it's logical for them to go
okay well this person is showing they
don't want to meet me there so instead
of trying to get this person to care
about something when it already seems
like they don't I'm going to find a way
to temporarily disconnect from this
person tend to my own pain or go to my
friends or community members or whatever
it is and help myself work through how
it felt kind of crummy to be rejected in
that circumstance and then if the
relationship I have with that person is
important to me and I really think that
they're going to be able to hear what
I'm saying I can go back to them and
explain how I felt hurt by the way that
they treated me but what's not going to
happen is they are not going to stay
stuck in that hurt permanently if the
other person continues to not care
because they have a lot of different
ways of getting their needs met
including their emotional intimacy needs
because secure people generally have a
diffuse network of people who've brought
into their lives because they genuinely
want to be there and want to do the work
of caring about each other so there's
not going to be this obsessive Focus or
need on getting the other person to care
if they just aren't showing up in the
way that you would hope when shering
yourself often if we air more anxious on
the attachment Spectrum we start
panicking if someone does not respond to
our feelings especially our vulnerable
feelings in the way that we would hope
because we start internalizing it as I
am bad and wrong for sharing this if the
other person does not respond with
kindness and warmth as opposed to having
worked our way to that worldview of I am
okay my feelings are okay and so if
someone else doesn't want to be close to
me in a way that includ includes me
sharing my feelings and my challenges
with them all of which is just a natural
extension of who I am as a person that's
okay it might hurt and I might have to
mourn the loss of that relationship if
that's what it comes to but it doesn't
mean that what I'm sharing is bad which
is what those who air more anxious might
be naturally inclined to default to if
they get rejected upon sharing
themselves vulnerably and it's actually
not that dissimilar for those who a
avoidant or fearful avoidant because
they grew up in hostile Environ ments
that reinforce the belief that
vulnerability is not something that we
bring to other people it's something we
keep to ourselves if they try out
vulnerability and are met with that same
hostility or rejection that they are
used to experiencing they're likely to
immediately turn that back on themselves
and go why did you try this we know this
is something we're supposed to keep
inside and then continue on with their
regular pattern of repressing those
things and this is in stark contrast to
the secure person who neither repress
resses their vulnerabilities if things
don't go well like the more avoidant
leaning people tend to do nor do they
double down on them like those who air
more anxious might be prone to doing
instead they just start looking cleanly
and logically at which relationships can
I show up vulnerably and honestly within
and how do I continue to nurture and
grow those and how do I set boundaries
around the relationships where I can't
do that because those relationships just
don't feel as good to be in it feels
weird to be in a relationship where I'm
kind of alone with a lot of my
experiences because the other person is
uncomfortable with them and this can go
a lot of different ways right so someone
who is more secure leaning who feels
rejected or like sharing themselves
vulnerably did not go the way that they
would have hoped in a relationship might
be able to go back in once they've
processed their feelings and talk to
that person and go hey this is something
that feels really important to me in
this relationship that I can share
myself in this way and that we can
explore together what my feelings are
like and do that kind of co-regulating
that is so common to healthy
relationships they're probably not going
to say it in therapy speak like that but
they're going to say some version of
that right they're going to bring their
needs in and give the person the option
to meet them if they would like to and
if the other person was kind of on this
end of the spectrum where they just
don't really know how to be comfortable
with their own vulnerability or with
other people's but they want to work on
it then that might have the potential to
be something that you work into a
relationship and work on together as a
long-term goal so this isn't a black or
white thing right it's not someone can
receive me perfectly or they're cut out
forever nor is it if someone can't
receive me perfectly I'll just try and
try and try even if they show no
interest in responding to me whatsoever
until I force the reaction that I want
out of them which again is not something
anybody consciously thinks of doing but
that unconsciously we tend to start
doing if we have a panic response around
being met with hostility when we share
vulnerably the happy medium is that I am
okay you are okay worldview where we
understand that there's nothing wrong
with our own feelings that sharing them
is just a natural way to get close to
other people and that if other people
don't like that it just means they don't
want to be close to us and that's okay
not everybody has to be close to us for
us to feel good about ourselves and
that's what it means to stay centered in
our own Integrity right we're not making
villains out of ourselves or other
people based on how others respond to
our vulnerability we're just logging it
as data and setting our boundaries
accordingly and when we have clear
boundaries in place because we care
about ourselves and we care about our
own vulnerability we're able to foster a
lot more relationships that include it
to be secure and in touch with your
emotional experience means that you
absolutely do notice when you're being
met with hostility or when someone is
being cruel or unkind to you and you
factor that into to your decision-
making so that's not someone you go back
to over and over again and try to keep
being vulnerable with it's someone you
adjust your boundaries around and
through adjusting your boundaries what
you eventually end up with is a life
where you have brought in a lot of
people who like vulnerable sharing and
self-disclosure and kept at arms length
a lot of people who don't and what that
allows for is for you to move through
life in a much more relaxed and embodied
way because you are minimizing your
interactions with people who you have to
kind of distort yourself or fake aspects
of your personality in order to stay
close with and you are maximizing your
exposure to people who like seeing the
whole you and who like the things that
you share honestly and openly with them
which isn't always going to be easy
stuff right it can be things like hey I
feel really angry about something that
happened in our relationship or I feel
really disappointed about how something
went between us these are also the
things that we're able to bring in as
vulnerable self-disclosures with the
people that we're close to and the more
we're surrounding ourselves with people
who can stay centered in their own I'm
okay you're okay worldviews and explore
those things with us the more we are
building a world for ourselves where
again we don't need to contort ourselves
in any way to stay in connection we just
stay close to the people who display an
honest and authentic desire to be close
and we set our boundaries accordingly
with people who consistently show to us
that they they aren't willing or capable
to meet us in that honest and open place
all right I think I'm going to leave
this at that for today as always let me
know in the comments any questions
Curiosities thoughts you had popping up
as you went through this video I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]