hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here this month on this
channel we're talking about heartbreak
and today in particular we're talking
about the pain of moving on from a liant
object and why it can be so hard to do
that so if you don't know what I mean
when I say the term liant object or limr
I do have a video that I'm going to link
in the description of this one that
unpacks that term and helps you
recognize when you might be experiencing
liance and how it shows up in your life
and your relationships but for those of
you who are already familiar with the
term what I want to talk about today is
why it can feel so hard to move on from
a liant relationship in a lot of cases
it can feel much harder than moving on
from relationships we had that were more
grounded in authentic connection and I
think that for a lot of people who
experience liance there can be a lot of
shame that comes up when we're trying to
get over a liant object and realizing
that it's just not happening or it's not
happening on the timeline that we would
want it to and I think a really big
reason for this is because we aren't
differentiating in our minds the
difference between a liant relationship
and an authentically connected
relationship getting over each of those
things is a fundamentally different
process so if we are treating getting
over liance the way we would treat
getting over the breakup of a
relationship that was more grounded in
presence and connection we are going to
be barking up the wrong tree and finding
ourselves continuously frustrated kind
of like taking cold medication when what
you're experiencing is an allergic
reaction if we're not properly
diagnosing the problem it's going to be
really hard to treat it so what we're
going to talk about today is how
limerance is fundamentally different
from authentic real-time connection
and how the exit routes out of liance
are going to be different as well as how
we can start spotting them so that if we
find ourselves in this place where we're
really stuck on this person that we may
never have actually dated or had a real
intimate connection with we can make
clear for ourselves what exactly it is
that we're struggling to move on from
and what skills we're going to have to
acquire in order to do that so we're
going to go into three primary reasons
why liance is so hard to get over as
well is where those exit routes out of
each of these problems might be the
first reason why lians can be so hard to
get over is because liant relationships
are trying to answer a fundamentally
different question for us internally
than non- liant relationships are so
when we have a non- liant relationship
so a relationship that is mostly based
in reality where we are not idealizing
or projecting or putting someone on a
pedestal in any significant way the
question that we are generally trying to
answer through that relationship is are
we a good fit is this person compatible
with me and my values and what I want
out of life do we have things to offer
each other that we both are going to be
happy to give and receive so in a secure
relationship on average we walk away
from an interaction feeling satisfied if
it feels like we have been in honest
connection with that person and we enjoy
what that honest authentic connection
feels like in a relationship the
question underlying the relationship
tends to be am I okay so it's not about
how you and the other person
authentically fit together or how your
values authentically align it's a
question of do I feel good and does my
self-esteem feel bolstered through my
connection with this person so when
we're liant we usually walk away from an
interaction feeling satisfied if our
self-esteem feels good after after the
interaction regardless of whether or not
we were actually connecting with the
person so when we look at that secure
connection is this person a good fit for
me if the answer is no even if there's
things that you really like about
someone it's going to be natural to move
on so you can both find people who are
better fits for you but if the question
that you're trying to answer through
your relationship with someone is am I
okay as a person and what you're
predominantly looking for unconsciously
out of that relationship is validation
and a sense of self-esteem you are not
necessarily going to walk away from that
relationship at the point where the two
of you are a bad fit because that isn't
your highest priority your highest
priority is soothing whatever
unconscious pain is causing you to need
to externalize your sense of self-worth
and that pain can go on for much longer
than the relationship itself ends up
working for in reality so something that
would pose a big problem in a secure
relationship and potentially end the
relationship might not even clock as a
problem if your relationship is
predominantly liance based for example
if a secure person gets into a
relationship with someone else and they
start to realize this person just
doesn't really get me and I don't really
get them we're not really clicking we're
not really able to go deep with each
other and mirror each other in the ways
that feel important for me to be
mirrored by another person that's going
to be a pretty clear indication that
that relationship probably just isn't
the right one for you however in a liant
relationship you might actually be
trying to avoid getting mirrored by
another person because your entire
worldview might be governed by toxic
shame and you might believe that if
someone were to ever really see you and
mirror the deepest parts of you they
would be absolutely disgusted so getting
into a relationship with someone who you
don't actually have that much in common
with
and then covering up that lack of
intimacy with liance is going to be
quite adaptive it's going to make you
keep feeling like okay I'm good I'm all
right I'm validated as long as this
person keeps approving of me and because
I'm not actually showing them my real
self I don't feel threatened inside of
this
relationship even though this
relationship is by definition not a
secure one if I am not showing up to it
honestly and allowing myself to be seen
and to see the other person clearly so
if this is the situation that we find
ourselves in and then we get left by the
other person it might feel really
confusing because to the other person
especially if they're more secure it
might be clear to them why the
relationship wasn't working out but
because we unconsciously are not looking
at the same criteria when it comes to
staying in versus leaving the
relationship we might stay really hung
up on a relationship that we actually
didn't have that much intimacy inside of
because it was giving us that sense of
I'm okay because this person is
approving of me I can feel good about
myself and when that's the question that
we are unconsciously trying to answer
through our relationships we're not
going to pick the most sensical
relationships to be in and it might feel
really confusing when we can't seem to
get over someone who we know on a
cognitive level we didn't have that much
in common with and weren't a great fit
for and so the kind of exit route out of
this problem we we have to learn to
detach the question of am I okay from
our thoughts about our liant object so
directly Target the part of ourselves
that needed that validation from that
person so badly when we are experiencing
liance what we are doing is projecting
some part of our self- relationship and
our own wounded self-esteem onto another
person and believing that their love can
fix the ways in which we don't love
ourselves this is not an personal
problem it's a self-esteem one so it
gets healed through working directly on
our sense of self-esteem and the more we
do that and the more we're able to get
that sense of validation and inner
okayness from other sources the less
kind of shiny and magical our liant
objects start looking and the more they
start looking like regular people just
like ourselves who we could connect with
or not connect with but either way the
connection's going to be most satisfying
when we are most in reality with each
other the next reason why we might
struggle to get over liance is because
it might be the best defense that we
currently have available to us against
loneliness so I find that very often the
people who experience chronic limerance
are people who have really deep wounds
or blocks in the areas that would allow
us to experience intimacy with people
and these are not blocks or wounds that
anybody would choose to have they're
often a product of the way that we learn
to adapt to our early environments by
not allowing ourselves to be deeply seen
and mirrored by other people often
because we believe that there is
something wrong with us and when that's
the case we tend to develop this idea
that I can be loved and cared about by
another person only when I'm acting as
if I am perfect
and when we go into a relationship with
that idea in our heads what we tend to
do is go in with a really strong mask on
so we show only the best parts of
ourselves and we hide at all costs
anything that is not flattering and then
the second we can kind of no longer keep
up the facade we Retreat from the
relationship either literally or
emotionally and when we are retreated
from a relationship what we're often
experiencing is loneliness because
whatever came up for us whether it was
anger whether it was a sense of
inadequacy whatever it was that we felt
we couldn't show to this other person is
now the pain that we are left to deal
with alone and when we are left to deal
with that pain if we do not have the
internal resources to regulate ourselves
around it going to liant Fantasy can be
a really nice way of mentally and
emotionally escaping that pain so you
might find that you have periods of time
where you are more or less liant and
that might be because there are periods
of your life where you are more or less
aware of that void of intimacy that you
have in your life if you don't have the
skills for creating it healthfully so I
think I've talked about this in a
previous video but I remember reading
the book the fantasy bond by Robert
Firestone for the first time it's one of
my all-time favorite books and it was
like this wall broke inside of my brain
where I understood what secure love was
for the first time I understood that
love means being present with someone
not just when they are at their best but
also when they are struggling and not
feeling turned off or disgusted or
turning away from a person in the
moments when they are imperfect and
often particularly those of us who grow
up with more avoidant patterning
internalized from a young age by no
fault of our own and often by no fault
deliberately of our caregivers they may
just have been socialized the same way
to believe that love was about
encouraging the best in people and
ignoring or politely turning away from
people's pain and struggle and the ways
in which they were not yet or not ever
showing up perfectly but if you think
that love is always supposed to look and
feel perfect and that you and the other
person are always supposed to be perfect
in love you are going to really struggle
to create truly intimate connections
because truly intimate connections are
connections where people see all parts
of each other and choose to stay on the
page with each other when it gets
uncomfortable and unflattering so I do
have a whole video that goes over this
specifically called the toxic shame
liance cycle and I will link it in the
description of this video but
essentially we want to get clear on here
is that the exit point if this is why
you're stuck on liance is to learn the
skills for building true intimacy so
once again I will link some videos in
the description of this one around
intimacy building but this might mean
making a fundamental shift in the way
that we think of romantic relationships
and if we are able to make that shift
and learn the skills for building true
deep intimacy we're going to feel less
of that loneliness that causes us to
turn to liance to get our intimacy needs
met in fantasy because we're not getting
them met in reality and the third reason
why liance can be so hard to let go of
is because liance might be serving a
very important purpose for us which is
we might be using fantasy to keep
something in our conscious awareness
that we are unable to tolerate the
direct conscious experience of so that
sounds like psycho Babble I will make
this clear John Bulby who was the father
of attachment Theory one of the
fundamental principles that he based the
theory on is this concept called
Defensive exclusion so when we are young
if there is information that it would be
psychologically intolerable for us to
integrate into our awareness so maybe
something like my parent is not perfect
what we learn to do is systematically
admit from our awareness any pieces of
evidence that might point to that
psychologically intolerable piece of
information the problem is that when we
are adults we are able to tolerate much
more than we were when we were children
because we are no longer dependent on
our caregivers so in theory we no longer
need to see them as perfect or in the
opposite case as all bad so that we can
keep seeing ourselves as good but these
patterns of thinking have already become
so entrenched in our worldview that now
we have blind spots we're unaware of
whenever we have a blind spot we're
unaware of it means some part of our
mind is still taking in the information
that we find too threatening to
experience consciously and so it's going
to come up unconsciously so I'll give a
more clear example let's say from a
young age I've had a very negative
self-image so a lot of toxic shame and
that might actually have been adap for
me in my early environment because maybe
in the environment that I grew up in I
was shamed or put down if I spoke highly
of myself because it was seen as
bragging and so in this example if I
learn to think of myself as someone who
is not very worthy it is going to stop
me unconsciously from bragging about
myself and getting shamed so it serves
an Adaptive purpose but there is a part
of me no matter how deeply I try to bury
it that knows that I'm deserving of
dignity and that it makes sense to feel
proud of what I have done well so now
that part of me that I cannot
consciously integrate because it is too
threatening for me to do so is going to
start coming out in something like
fantasies so maybe I meet someone and
develop limerance around them and I
become obsessed with the idea that they
might notice my value and my worth and I
start obsessively fantasizing about how
good it would feel to receive praise
from them in reality this is the praise
that I have disconnected from my image
of myself because it was once
threatening for me to acknowledge and
admit to myself that there were things
that I was proud of so now I'm
projecting it outwards onto another
person in order to keep that part of my
unconscious experience active and alive
and in my awareness because it is part
of my wholeness as a person to feel
proud of myself but again I've had to
consciously disconnect from that so it's
coming out in this kind of subconscious
way through fantasies or whatever it is
so in this way liance can actually serve
as a lesson it can be pointing us
towards the disowned parts of ourselves
that we want to integrate and so what we
want to really think about here is
what's happening in our limr fantasies
how are our liant objects treating us or
what traits do they have that we are
almost obsessively
in admiration of and do we possess those
same traits in ourselves or are those
traits that we have learned to repress
for whatever reason in ourselves this
can often point us towards areas where
we need to do some integration work and
so the exit route out of liance here is
noticing what it is that we're so
desperate for that we have all of this
Obsession around that we're projecting
on to another person and recognizing
that is how badly a part of me wants to
integrate this trait and if I can spend
some time doing that and working on
building up that part of myself we're
going to once again find that our liant
starts naturally dissipating and we're
starting to see other people more
clearly because we're seeing ourselves
as on par with them so now it's just
about going out and figuring out who do
I match well with who is able to mirror
the parts of me that I like about myself
back to me as well as the parts of
myself that I don't like as much who can
hold both things with compassion and who
can I do the same thing for who can I
tolerate being around not only when I'm
seeing them as perfect but also when I'm
seeing them in a less flattering light
and as soon as we're looking for
relationships based on that criteria we
are no longer needing to cover up all of
the murky parts of Being Human with
Lance and that begins the process of
having reality-based
relationships so for example I once had
a romantic relationship end in a way
that in reality I knew there was no
going back to but in the coming weeks I
noticed myself continuously returning to
thoughts of this person and having these
thoughts like oh should I go back should
I try again should I reach out and
contact them and at this point I'd been
mostly liant sober for long enough in my
life that that kind of raised a red flag
in my brain I went okay I know that by
all secure principles this person and I
were not a good fit and there is not a
good reason for me to return to that
relationship so what I'm going to do is
really examine the thoughts and the
feelings I'm having come up around this
person and so the more I sat with my
thoughts and my feelings around this
person the more I noticed that what I
was most craving was the Solitude and
Stillness that I felt inside of my
relationship with this person because at
a young age something I had internalized
was I have to be in constant motion
working my butt off in order to get
anything that I want out of life and it
was psychologically threatening for me
to even think about carving out
intentional time in space for me to
Simply do nothing and be still but this
person who is no longer a part of my
life was someone who was exceptionally
good at prioritizing that in their own
life and who really had internalized the
value of taking time for Stillness and
deep reflection and because it was still
psychologically threatening for me to
internalize that I could hold that same
value because again my whole world viiew
was oriented around good things come to
those who go out and chase after them
with everything they have in them I was
projecting that need for Stillness onto
that other person which showed me an
area that I really needed to integrate
inside of my C and so the idea here is
that liance is often pointing us towards
the parts of ourselves that we have not
yet integrated and if we can be present
with those parts of ourselves and start
sculpting out space for them inside of
our Lives we might naturally find that
once again our liance starts to fade and
we start to see other people and
ourselves as well as our compatibility
with other people much more
realistically so just to reiterate the
idea here is that if you are feeling a
surplus of shame because you feel like
you aren getting over a liant object on
a regular timeline or through the usual
ways that we get over breakups it's
probably because you have not yet
acknowledged that the end of a liant
relationship and the the end of a secure
relationship are two completely
different things to get rid of liance we
have to tackle it at the core which is
whatever wound is causing us to project
a part of our wholeness onto another
person and once we're able to heal that
wound liance naturally Falls away from
our worldview we just need to make sure
we're taking the right medicine for the
problem that we actually have
all right I think that's all I have to
say for today on this topic as always
let me know in the comments what you're
thinking feeling any questions you have
as you've gone through this video as
always I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really
[Music]
soon