hey guys heidi preeb here i have lost
track of how many times i've recorded
this video now because i am so hell-bent
on getting it right and the reason why i
want to get this video right so badly is
because i think one of the number one
misunderstandings of attachment theory
if not the number one misunderstanding
of attachment theory is the idea that if
you have both anxious and avoidant
traits you must be fearful avoidant no
no no no no no no no
yes the fearful avoidant has traits of
both the anxious style and the avoidance
style however so does every style so
anxiously attached people will borrow
avoidant behaviors and will feel
avoidant sometimes avoidantly attached
people will borrow anxious behaviors and
will feel anxious sometimes and securely
attached people will absolutely feel
both anxious and avoidant depending on
what situation they're in fearful
avoidant attachment
is its own beast when it comes to
attachment so yes there are anxious and
avoidant elements to this style but the
whole is greater than the sum of the
parts when it comes to fearful avoidance
so it's not just that you feel both ways
at different times there is this deep
ongoing internal struggle in terms of
your own goals direction and motivation
for the fearful avoidant that is not
there in the same way with the other
styles so when we're figuring out what
our attachment styles are we have to
look not at our behaviors but at the
motivation behind our behaviors so the
anxiously attached person might feel
let's say avoidant if they're in the
wrong relationship they're with someone
that they don't really want to be with
but they're afraid of being alone so
they might feel kind of freaked out and
avoidant until they find the
relationship that they actually want to
be in but once they're there they will
be gunning for that long-term security
that intimacy that hit of togetherness
that they constantly want
versus the avoidant could actually feel
let's say anxious in a relationship
where they are entitled to take a huge
amount of space and where they don't
really need to show up in an intimate
and emotionally connected way they might
feel anxious about losing that
relationship because they know this is
probably my only shot at having a
relationship where i can function in the
way that i prefer to function without
compromising my attachment system and
learning to be emotionally intimate so
you have to look not at the behaviors
people are taking and not even just at
the feelings that people are having but
at the motivation that is driving those
feelings and behavior and when we get to
the fearful avoidance style you'll see
that the motivations of this type are
quite disoriented and that is what
characterizes it as different from the
anxious or the avoidant style is that
internal disorientation about am i
supposed to be going right or left am i
supposed to be wanting love or wanting
independence there is a chronic
sense of distrusting the self but also
not ever being able to put trust in
other people so we're gonna go over how
all of that plays out and in this video
i am going to be making a lot a lot of
distinctions between the fearful
avoidant and both the anxious and
avoidant styles because again these
behaviors can be seen across a range of
different attachment styles but what
we're looking at here is why the fearful
avoidant is doing what they're doing and
what their internal experiences relative
to the other attachment styles and of
course it's me so i will have a bunch of
metaphors sprinkled through this video
that hopefully are helpful but we'll see
so sign number one that you might have a
fearful avoidant attachment style and
this is the kind of classic one you
crave intimacy desperately but you have
a deep and intense fear of committed
relationships so what you'll really
often see with fearful avoidance is that
they want closeness they want connection
it's not like the avoidant style where
when you meet them they're kind of cold
and a little bit distant and it takes
them a long time to warm up fearful
avoidance often arrive in relationships
with warmth with presence with emotional
intensity in a lot of cases but most of
them have early experiences of
enmeshment so what that means is that
from a young age a lot of fearful
avoidance kind of internalized the idea
that to be in a relationship means to
give up my independence and my sense of
self and to give endlessly of myself to
the other person so there is this
struggle that goes on in the minds of
the fearful avoidant because they are
people people they really like close
intimate connections but they are very
afraid of losing their sense of self in
a relationship so they make this deal
with themselves a lot of the time that
i'll go into a relationship i'll get
that hit of intimacy i'll get that sense
of connectedness but i'm going to pull
back and i'm not going to enter into
this relationship long term because to
be in a relationship long term would
mean to lose my sense of self and i
don't want to do that so they kind of
look at relationships as like short term
solutions to emotional pain that they
feel or to a sense of needing intimacy
but unlike the anxious style they don't
want that relationship to continue
long-term they're very afraid of the
relationship lasting so what you'll
often have as your internal experience
as a fearful avoidant is it's kind of
like saying okay i really want to go to
the store but it's cold outside right so
i'm just going to bear the cold until i
get to the store and for the fearful
avoidant relationships are kind of like
saying okay i really want intimacy and
closeness but i know i have to give up
my sense of self to do it so i'm just
gonna bear the separation from myself
for as long as i need to be in this
relationship but eventually i'm gonna
need to return to myself and they
haven't learned that you can integrate
your sense of independence and your
ability to be emotionally close with
someone which is what the securely
attached individual knows however unlike
the anxious style who doesn't have that
same sense of independence and that
strong sense of who they are outside of
a relationship the anxious style can
feel kind of relieved when they're like
merging their identity with someone else
right because it's kind of like finally
i'm getting some help regulating myself
and figuring out who i am and on the
other side of things the avoidant
doesn't ever really give up their sense
of self inside of a relationship they
keep their boundaries pretty strong even
within a relationship but the fearful
avoidant engages in that sense of
merging but misses the person they are
when they're outside of a relationship
when they're in one so you often see
them entering into a lot of short-term
relationships breaking things off when
things get intense or panicking in their
long-term relationships and kind of
chronically looking for the exit signs
even if they love someone even if
they're happy to be with someone there
is this sense of i can't be my full
independent self in a relationship so i
have to always know when this is going
to be over that sense that you know this
will end is a big feeling of relief for
the fearful avoidant because they're
like once this ends i get my sense of
self back and that can feel like either
a win-win situation or a lose-lose
situation and by win-win lose lose i
mean like internally depending on the
day the mood they're in the needs they
have what's being triggered for them but
essentially what you need to know is
that the fearful avoidance tends to only
feel comfortable in relationships where
there is an expiry date an end date or
when they can at least tell themselves
i'm gonna get out of it at this point
the idea of long-term commitment even to
someone they really love is terrifying
sign number two that you might have a
fearful avoidant attachment style you
ricochet between overtaking
responsibility in a relationship and
undertaking it so this is a bit of a
complex concept and i'm gonna spend a
lot of time on it because it really
matters so we'll talk about this a
little bit more as the video goes on but
the fearful avoidant tends to have very
unhealthy relationships and the reasons
why are myriad and complex but for now
what you need to know is that you will
often see a sense of kind of
disorientation with the fearful avoidant
they might not admit this but they often
feel like i don't know if i am an
abusive person or if i am being abused
and they often feel like in
relationships i know this is toxic i
know this is unhealthy but one day i'll
think that it's all my fault and the
next day i'll think it's all my
partner's fault and i can't really
figure out where the truth is like who's
good and who's bad and the reason why is
because they're switching between
anxious and avoidant world views so in
the anxious world view i kind of like to
think of it as having one sense of
emotional gravity outside of the south
so the anxiously attached person places
a really big emphasis on what's
happening in their relationships and in
the world outside of them because they
believe that one's internal reactions
are a direct response to what's
happening in the world so there can be
this blind spot around the inner world
for the anxiously attached person like
they might think if someone yells at me
if someone calls me a mean name i'm
going to be sad that's just cause and
effect like there isn't as much of a
mediating factor of the individual's
emotional regulation system whereas on
the flip side an avoidantly attached
person might be actively getting
verbally abused and they're just kind of
like wow that person's an like
something's going on with them and there
isn't that same sense of because someone
says something to me i have to
emotionally react to it there is a very
clear sense of differentiation between
self and other for avoidantly attached
people but with anxiously attached
people there is almost no
differentiation so they tend to think
like if someone does something mean to
me if someone is rude to me if someone
upsets me then of course i'm going to be
emotionally upset right until they start
working on their attachment wounding
they don't realize there is the
opportunity for me to pause reflect and
choose my reaction and this is why for
anxiously attached individuals i find
that this is the type most likely to
kind of be like my partner's a
narcissist my partner's a psychopath
because there's this thing called
psychic equivalence where basically you
believe that the extent to which you're
feeling bad must reflect the extent that
the situation you're in is unhealthy and
victimizing you but often what's
happening is that the anxiously attached
person might be having a trauma response
or an emotional flashback where let's
say they're in a situation where they're
having a fight with their partner and it
is triggering these feelings from like
early early childhood and they are
feeling overwhelmingly negative and
hateful towards themselves and like
they'll never get anything right and
they don't understand that that's an
internal reaction that isn't coming from
the outside so they think i must be
feeling this bad because my partner is
so terrible to me because they
automatically think that their emotions
are a genuine reflection of the
situation they're in so that's i think a
lot of the reason why we get a lot of
anxious people like pointing the finger
a lot and calling other people like
toxic and gaslighters and narcissists
because that sense of psychic
equivalence which is the extent to which
i feel bad inside must be a reflection
of how unhealthy my environment is is
very very natural for them especially if
they've never learned about like trauma
responses and emotional flashbacks and
how our limbic like animal brain gets
activated in interpersonal situations
and reminds us of the past and this is
also why anxiously attached people
idealize their partner so much right
because they can also have emotional
flashbacks that kind of feel good like
someone they have a crush on will take
an interest in them and suddenly they
feel like oh my god i can relax into the
feeling that i'm worth loving and that
feels so good and like such a relief
from my regular suffering that it must
be because this person who is loving me
is an absolute saint an angel like sent
down from heaven the best person on
earth and they will over attribute their
positive feelings to other people as
well so with the anxiously attached
style we see that blind spot in the
sense of they don't realize much of the
time that their emotional experience is
being mediated by their own brain their
own physiology their own hormones and
they often think that any emotion i'm
feeling is a direct reflection of my
environment
now with the avoidantly attached person
you will have the absolute opposite of
this the avoidantly attached person
tends to feel very cut off from or
differentiated from their environment
and their center of emotional gravity is
very much internal meaning even if
someone is sitting there throwing
insults at them it's not that this will
never hurt it will hurt and often it
will hurt on kind of an unconscious
level that they don't necessarily
realize and take the time to process but
the avoidant person is more likely to
kind of be sitting there in observation
mode going huh this person's very upset
that's interesting i wonder what's
leading them to be upset there will be a
sense of that person's emotion belongs
to them and my emotions belong to me so
they won't necessarily think that
someone being rude to them means they
have to be upset they can rationalize
with themselves and go well does it
really matter to me what that person's
opinion is if no there's no need to be
upset about what they think of me even
if it's insulting and while this sounds
like a kind of stoic and zen state it
actually does cut the avoidant off from
the ability to feel interpersonally in a
really deep and connected way and that
can lead to some really intense
struggles with loneliness depression
substance abuse and all sorts of other
negative outcomes for the avoidant type
but this sense of i am completely
responsible for all of my own emotions
and what everyone else does is their
business is kind of that inherent
mindset of the avoidant type so
avoidance while they might look down on
people they might make judgments of
other people you are very very rarely
going to find them saying something like
oh that person made me feel sad that
person made me upset because the
avoidantly attached person believes that
they are radically responsible for their
own internal emotional experience so
they can say like oh that person yelled
at me and then i internalized what they
said and now i'm thinking of myself in a
different way like there's this sense of
being able to observe one's emotional
experience but there's not the same
connection between the self and the
environment the same way that you see
for the anxiously attached type or you
see this in a healthy way with a secure
type right so the secure type has kind
of an inner emotional center of gravity
but they can also kind of share in
someone else's center of gravity so
they're able to both have a dynamic
interplay emotionally with someone else
where they can kind of feel what someone
else is feeling and really feel
connected to them in real time like
they're kind of flowing together
emotionally but they don't lose their
sense of self in that process so the
secure person is kind of like yeah when
there's green flags when everything
feels good i can flow with someone
else's energy but at the end of the day
i always know that my emotions belong to
me and if i feel hurt or upset by
something i can take care of that within
myself or i can talk it out with that
person depending on what's appropriate
right there is this ability to discern
between when self-care is needed and
when relational repair is needed and
often with a securely attached person
you see them doing both
but with fearful avoidance you see them
doing neither so what will often happen
is the fearful avoidance will have this
internal sense of gravity and so they'll
be in a relationship and they'll be like
okay i understand that i'm choosing to
be in this relationship which means i
need to suppress all my needs because
that's a belief that they tend to have
that you can't have needs in a
relationship i need to give this other
person what they want and i need to
forget about what i want now you will
also see this in the anxiously attached
style and we talked about that in the
anxious attachment video but what will
eventually happen with the fearful
avoidance is that the sense of
resentment might build up again similar
to the anxiously attached style and they
might explode suddenly the anxious part
of their attachment system is activated
and they'll be like well if i'm giving
up all this stuff for you you need to do
this this and this or else i'm not going
to be happy and they can suddenly be
angry that they've been doing so much
and giving so much and this other person
isn't giving them what they need in
return now again this kind of mirrors
the anxious experience anxiously
attached people will also very much
relate to that but what's different is
that often after that happens at some
point the fearful avoidance will go into
deactivation mode and when they are in
deactivation mode it's like their center
of gravity has completely returned to
inside of the self and they might look
at their actions and go oh my god why
did i do that
what was i why was i trying to get
something out of someone else i'm
responsible for my emotions i'm
responsible for my experience of life me
trying to change someone else or get
someone to give something to me is
completely controlling absurd i must be
emotionally abusive and to be fair they
can be emotionally abusive any of the
insecure styles are very likely to be
emotionally abusive towards their
partners in some way whether or not it's
intentional usually not but the fearful
avoidant because they ricochet between
these two mindsets is the most likely to
notice that they are behaving very
differently in different situations and
because they are kind of cut off from
half of their reasoning at any given
point in time they can feel very
confused almost about who they are and
what their intentions are so to compare
with the anxiously attached person let's
say they explode at their partner right
afterwards they might realize oh i
really overreacted there i went too far
i let my emotions get the best of me i
should go apologize and repair and find
a way to make this right with my partner
i mean that's generous like they might
also double down and be like i was right
but you know that's a risk of anyone
just being a person but then the
avoidantly attached person also at times
can't explode on their partners but
they're also more likely to kind of pull
back retreat and go okay why did i do
that you know i had a strong emotional
response and it's definitely my fault
because one is always responsible for
one's emotional responses so what do i
need to change about this situation to
make sure it doesn't happen again do i
need to stop being with this partner
because obviously i get quite frustrated
around them and it's not fair for me to
be with someone who i feel frequently
frustrated around or something like that
right so even if again the reasoning is
not that generous the difference is that
for the avoidantly attached person
they'll always be looking at their own
inner experience and why they chose to
do that versus the anxiously attached
person will always be looking at the
situation right so even when they're
apologizing they might kind of be like
yeah i felt really upset because this
this and this has happened in our
relationship i didn't react the proper
way and i really went overboard right
but they still feel connected to the
emotional part of themselves that led to
that reaction in the first place it's
still active enough in their psyche for
them to be able to understand why they
did what they did but when the fearful
avoidance is in deactivation mode they
might feel like i can no longer feel
connected to the emotion that i had in
that situation i feel like i went crazy
i feel like i was not myself and so they
might look at their behavior through
like a very logical very almost
psychological stance and then they might
feel like overwhelming guilt
overwhelming feelings of like i need to
completely change my act i need to
really figure out what it is within
myself that reacts in these intense
strong emotional ways and they'll feel
like i must be crazy something must be
really wrong with me because when
they're deactivated they can't access
the emotions that they were feeling in
that situation and they can't properly
process the fact that there is an
interplay between themselves and the
other person that is creating an
emotional loop they believe when they're
deactivated like the avoidant that
nothing their partner does can affect
them that nothing their partner does
really has to do with how they're
feeling and so they will overtake
responsibility for the relationship
maybe like believe that they're the
narcissist they're the abuser they're
the sociopath but then when they're
activated again those emotions come back
so it is this kind of vicious cycle and
often something you'll notice if you
talk to a fearful avoidant over a long
period of time is that they feel very
disoriented because they know
something's wrong in their relationship
but they really don't know where to put
the blame one day they think it's all
them the next day they think it's all
their partner and it's a very
disorienting experience where they have
a lot of trouble integrating their
emotional self which has the center of
gravity outside the self and believes
that other people impact the way they
feel and their inner self where they
have that internal center of gravity and
they believe that everything i feel i am
responsible for and the outside world
doesn't affect me at all it is a very
difficult experience to kind of ricochet
between those two extremes and not have
a linear sense of where is my center of
gravity located right for the anxious
style it might be like eighty percent of
the time my center of gravity feels like
it's outside of me and other people are
always impacting the way that i feel and
the circumstances of my life are always
impacting the way i feel but twenty
percent of the time i have that kind of
internal groundedness and for the
avoidant it might feel like the opposite
right like 80 of the time i feel really
grounded internally and like i am
responsible for my own reactions but
maybe 20 of the time things really get
to me but for the fearful avoidant it
might be closer to the center right so
they don't really know should i invest
in my relationships should i invest in
self-work and that can be very confusing
and disorienting which leads us to sign
number three that you might have a
fearful avoidant attachment style and
these will start going faster from here
on out i promise you feel like you don't
deserve a healthy relationship because
you see your own bad behavior so clearly
and you kind of have this core belief
that you are bad and not worthy of
healthy love now this again is
differentiated from the anxious and the
avoidant attachment style so the anxious
attachment style might have low
self-esteem right it's common to not
necessarily feel like as capable or as
desirable as other people if you're
anxiously attached and there will always
be that insecurity there but you do tend
to feel when you're anxiously attached
like at my core i'm a good well-meaning
person who has a lot of love to give and
that love could be wonderful for someone
else and i want to be able to give it to
someone and to receive it in return and
on the other side of things you have the
avoidantly attached person who tends to
believe you know maybe i'm not the most
emotional person but i'm definitely
solid and stable in my resources and
there's a lot i can practically offer to
other people if i choose to have a
relationship with someone but with the
fearful avoidant because they're so
aware of the fact that they have these
strong emotional impulses but they also
have this fear of commitment and they're
very aware of when they're manipulating
people they tend to believe i am bad
something is wrong with me i ruin
people's lives i should not be with a
healthy person now is this true it is
not any more true for the fearful
avoidant than it is for any of the other
attachment styles right so all of the
insecure attachment styles are prone to
having unhealthy relationships what's
distinct about the fearful avoidant is
that they really do tend to see
themselves at least after a period of
time as the common denominator but they
might feel helpless because they so
don't understand their own psychology
that they're just kind of like well if i
keep doing bad things it must be because
i am a bad person so they have enough
clarity to notice the patterns of their
life and to see themselves as the common
denominator there but they don't have
enough self-awareness to understand that
there is a reason why this is happening
for them and it's more to do with
triggers and to do with the way that
their brain neurologically formed than
it is to do with them having bad
intentions i actually think that inside
of every fearful avoidant person there
is like this ball of
pureness like this this
sense of wanting so badly to love and to
be loved and to give something positive
to the world and to receive positive
things from the world because there's
like this little child that still lives
in them right and their adult self is
confused and disoriented and doesn't
know which way to turn but it's not
because they are inherently bad it's
because they just got so wired for
self-protection so early on but the good
news is that if they choose to nurture
that kind of good pure well-meaning part
of themselves that is where all of the
healing ends up coming from right it's
about growing that like ball of light
that i see inside of insecurely attached
people just bigger and bigger and bigger
and bigger until you can apply good
intentions even when you're in a messy
situation and you can trust look i am a
good person i don't want to hurt people
i don't want to hurt myself but i'm
really struggling right now so where can
i compromise where can i meet my own
needs but also not actively make things
worse for other people and that is what
the healing journey ends up looking like
for the fearful avoidant and as they go
on that journey they start to understand
people are not all good or all bad and
they are not all good or all bad people
are complicated relationships are
complicated morality is complicated our
individual self concepts are complicated
right but with the unhealed fearful
avoidant you do really tend to see this
mindset of like i'm a bad person the
love that i have to give is toxic and
bad and i can be really abusive in a lot
of cases so they tend to see themselves
as not deserving of healthy love and so
if someone tries to give it to them
they're going to reject that person last
thing i will say the anxious style might
relate to what i just said as well but
for them it's more about the fact that
they will see someone trying to give
them healthy love as needy because
they're looking for a person who
actually isn't very emotionally
available because they perceive avoidant
people to be kind of inherently needless
and their unconscious mind goes oh
there's a person who could take care of
my needs because they're not preoccupied
with their own so with the anxious style
when they meet let's say a secure person
and the secure person like shares their
own emotions with them the anxious
person might be like ugh like i don't
want that and they think it's because oh
i'm feeling avoidant but it's often
actually because they feel like i want
someone to be completely emotionally
available to attend to my needs so i'm
going to be a little bit put off by
someone who expresses their own needs to
me even if it's in a perfectly healthy
way now this is different than the
fearful avoidant will feel more along
the lines of like oh i see goodness in
you i see good intent in you if you get
close to me i'm gonna like contaminate
you with my badness right so it's an
avoidance of secure healthy love but for
different reasons again the motivations
behind the same behavior stems from a
different place sign number four that
you might have a fearful avoidant
attachment style is that you always want
other people to go first when it comes
to intimacy vulnerability and opening up
so something that distinguishes the
fearful avoidant type from either the
anxious or the avoidant type is their
approach to intimacy and getting close
to people so with the anxious style
because their emotions and their center
of emotional gravity is so outside of
the self if you will they don't always
see something as intimate or vulnerable
the same way that a secure or someone on
the avoidance spectrum would they just
kind of feel like well i'm talking about
what's happening for me and what's
happening for me is what i'm reacting to
emotionally so it doesn't necessarily
feel all that intimate or invasive for
them to share their feelings with
someone else they just kind of see it as
like well i'm just telling you what's
going on and on the flip side of things
avoidance might feel like no matter how
close they get in relationships they're
always going to keep a certain level of
emotional distance from the other person
and the secure person kind of feels like
there's an interplay of this energy for
them so their center of emotional
gravity is definitely internal they feel
like they're in control of their
responses the majority of the time but
they can also kind of get into tune with
someone else emotionally if you will so
what that means is that the secure
person is never really giving over
ownership of their emotions right
they're never truly putting their entire
well-being and heart in someone else's
hands and saying please keep this safe
they're kind of going i'm okay with
myself but also i like when we can
engage with each other i like when we
can share in the experience of life and
when we can have an influence on the way
that one another feels and thinks and so
there's almost this natural sense of
collaborative loving energy between
secure people and the people that they
choose to surround themselves with they
never really lose themselves in a
relationship and they always feel
independent but they really recognize
that people affect each other and we
have to be conscious and thoughtful
about what we say to other people and
also about what kind of people we
surround ourselves with because we do
emotionally react to the people in our
lives and why not make it as easy as
possible by making sure that we're
surrounding ourselves with healthy
loving people who probably aren't going
to make anything harder than it has to
be for us now with the fearful avoidant
they kind of feel like i can either keep
my center of emotional gravity inside of
myself or i can give it up and hand it
over to someone but if i do that i need
to be really sure that that person isn't
going to hurt me so they tend to be a
lot more guarded when you first get to
know them even though they'll probably
come in with a lot of warmth a lot of
presence a lot of attention and it can
actually feel like you're connecting
very deeply with the fearful avoidant
when you first get to know them and then
you might walk away kind of realizing
like oh i didn't actually learn that
much about them but i feel really
connected and the reason why that
happens is because the fearful avoidant
really wants deep connections they want
that hit of intimacy they want to
understand and feel understood so they
tend to be pretty good naturally at
making other people feel comfortable and
safe to express themselves and to talk
about kind of deeper things with them
but the fearful avoidance doesn't want
to go to those same places in themselves
until they're sure that the power
dynamic in the situation is tipped in
their favor and the reason for that is
because fearful avoidance believe that
people are kind of naturally inclined to
hurt each other to betray each other if
it makes sense to they don't have that
kind of belief in the common good nature
of man right they kind of think
everyone's out for themselves and so i
have to make sure that if i am handing
over any sort of vulnerable information
about myself to someone i have to know
that either i have something worse on
them so if they spell my secret i can
spell theirs or i have to be reasonably
sure that let's say that person really
likes me maybe a lot more than i like
them so it's not as big a risk to share
something with them because i know that
they're probably not going to hurt me
because my rejection of them would hurt
them right so they're kind of always
evaluating what's the likelihood that
this person is safe for me to open up to
but unlike the secure or even the
anxious style they don't look for
markers of safety like oh the person is
warm and kind and comforting that can be
there for sure but it's more likely to
be this person has already showed me all
of their cards so now i can flip over
mine knowing that they don't have
anything up their sleeve that they could
defeat me with emotionally so to speak
and something i find really interesting
is that i think there can also be this
tendency for fearful avoidance to kind
of have almost like a public persona
that is true to their inner world or
that hints at something very deep within
them or even like the way that they
interact with people again because
they're so warm and open and engaging it
can be really easy to mistake this type
for secure at a first glance because
they don't have that kind of cold
withdrawn nature of the avoidant but
they also don't have that kind of
frantic emotional energy of the anxious
so they seem kind of common regulated
but then if you try to go a little bit
deeper with them they won't open up the
same way that a secure person will at
least definitely not right away right
it'll take them a while to really feel
like okay i now know you better than you
know me which means it's safe for me to
start disclosing a little bit more to
you but often there can be like this
disconnect where people approach them
expecting them to be really warm and
open the way a secure person would be
and then get kind of confused when like
the fearful avoidance isn't offering
that actual experience of emotional
intimacy they might be comfortable
asking you questions and getting to know
you really well but it's going to take
them a long time to share anything
that's going to be actually vulnerable
for them even if they've already kind of
hinted that that's in there somewhere so
you also generally will see this in
terms of who pursues versus weights to
be pursued and there are exceptions all
across the board with this but generally
speaking i've seen that anxiously
attached people tend to be a little bit
less worried about rejection because
they really do believe internally like i
am a warm loving person who has a lot of
love to share with someone so i'm going
to go out and kind of like try to give
that love to people and see who's
interested and see which of the people
who i take an interest in reciprocate
but with the fearful avoidance what i
think you'll see more often is that they
wait until someone takes an interest in
them and they can be reasonably sure
that they're not going to get rejected
to start reciprocating emotion so they
can be less likely to do the chasing
because again chasing someone and trying
to form a relationship with someone
requires showing vulnerability and
showing vulnerability is very difficult
for the fearful avoidant they have a lot
of boundaries up their center of gravity
is naturally located internally until
they decide it's time to give it over
because they see it as kind of a safe
bet but you're really not going to see
that early vulnerability with the
fearful avoidant the same way you might
with anxious or secure types sign number
five that you might have a fearful
avoidant attachment style is that you
can be very rational and logical and you
can also be very emotional and
emotionally reactive but not at the same
time so
this creates kind of a very confusing
jekyll and hyde situation for the
fearful avoidant but also for the people
who know the fearful avoidant and this
can get very confusing for the fearful
avoidance peers and first i'll explain a
little bit more about what this means so
if you are anxiously attached what that
means is that essentially early on you
really learn to trust your internal felt
experience of living so you learned my
emotions are a pretty good predictor of
what's going on in my environment and
you learn to focus on that so heavily
that you trust your feelings and your
empirical experiences a lot more than
you trust kind of detached analyzation
right and if you have an avoidant
attachment style the opposite happened
so early on you found that your emotions
were not a strong predictor of what was
going to happen in your environment and
they weren't that useful to focus on so
you learn to over rely on looking for
cause and effect and trying to figure
out like which rules and logical
principles govern the world now the
problem is that if you only rely on one
of those things it gets really difficult
to make informed decisions and inform
judgments because let's say you're only
looking at the emotional side of things
you might completely neglect the fact
that choosing something that makes you
feel good over and over again or chasing
the kind of people who make you feel
good over and over again but maybe
aren't giving you the kind of commitment
you want is a bad strategy you don't
think of the way that you're approaching
your life in terms of strategy you just
think of it as i follow my heart and so
you rarely pause to figure out like what
mechanically isn't working here where is
my strategy that i don't want to call a
strategy but that absolutely is one
going wrong and on the flip side of
things if you're avoidant and you've
learned to rely on logic and discount
the way that you feel you're really
going to have trouble feeling your way
out of problems that actually require
the integration of emotion because not
everything in life functions in a
perfectly rational way especially
relationships with other people but if
you're not in touch with what you want
and what you feel on a deep level logic
is not going to get you out of a lot of
situations so you end up seeing a lot of
logical distortions in the avoidant type
the same way you see emotional
distortions in the anxious type because
it's kind of like each type is over
relying on a certain area of their brain
where actually a different type of
processing is needed to solve that
problem so you get really strange kind
of neurotic thought patterns in both the
avoidant and the anxious style now with
the securely attached individual they're
able to integrate emotion and logic so
what that looks like is let's say a
secure person really wants something
like a job or whatever and it's not
necessarily the highest paying job it's
not necessarily the job that gives them
the most linear route to where they want
to go professionally but they know
day-to-day that job is going to provide
me with a lot of satisfaction they're
able to integrate emotion with logic by
going okay i'm going to make this choice
and i'm just going to be aware of the
fact that it's not necessarily going to
be making me as much money as i might
want so i might need to look for
supplemental forms of income and it's
not necessarily going to help me advance
as quickly as i might like but quality
of life is really important to me and
liking the work that i do every day
really matters to me so i'm going to
compromise a little bit on the logic and
just be aware of that and be aware of
what i might need to do to supplement
that in order to prioritize that quality
of life and then on the flip side of
things let's say there is something that
requires them to rely on logic a little
bit more so let's say they want to go
back to school and they know that's
going to make me super busy super
stressed i'm going to feel really
overworked and a bit under resourced for
a year but i can withstand that
discomfort i can put aside my desire to
feel good for a while because i know
that in the long term this is going to
be a really positive outcome for me so
secure attachment is able to balance
logic and emotion and find solutions
that either account for both ones or
just allow them to choose one with an
awareness of what problems that's going
to cause for them in the other area and
then they can holistically manage their
well-being by being aware of everything
that goes into it
now if you are fearful avoidant the
problem is that you have access to both
distorted emotion like the anxiously
attached person and distorted logic like
the avoidant person but you haven't
learned to integrate those things the
way a secure person does so you might be
able to say like i really want this job
it really lights me up and i know it's
not the best choice but i'm just going
to choose it anyway but when you are
activated in your anxious attachment
system and you are making decisions
based on emotion and emotional
distortions you don't take the logic
into account you're kind of not thinking
about that when you're in that state
right so you can make a series of
emotional decisions without even being
aware of the fact that this is going to
cause major problems for me in another
area and this tracks with the experience
of the anxiously attached person but
then what happens is when you are
deactivated when you are shutting down
from your emotional attachment system
and you go into avoidance mode you're
now going to look at your life and be
like oh my god i've only been making
these terrible emotional decisions what
am i doing now i need to get my life
together and then you will go into only
logical decision making and for a period
of time you will do only what makes
sense you will cut yourself off from
emotion you will kind of starve yourself
emotionally and what distinguishes this
when the fearful avoidant does it from
when the anxiously attached person does
the same thing because the anxiously
attached person will do this sometimes
the fearful avoidance feels good when
they're in deactivation mode like it
kind of feels like a relief like finally
i'm on my own i'm not bothering with
these relationships i'm independent i'm
choosing what matters i'm prioritizing
what's logical but
later on at some point they will get
triggered back into their anxious
activation strategies and then they
might flip to the other extreme and go
back to making only emotional decisions
and the problem is that this is very
disorienting because it makes it really
difficult for you to keep pursuing a
linear direction for your life right
because you're always trying to over
rely on one form of reasoning without
integration of the other and i've
noticed that an area this really shows
up for a lot of fearful avoidance there
can be this pattern a fearful avoidance
speaking very negatively about their
relationships about their partner and
they'll speak about their relationship
with what seems to be like a very high
level of self-awareness so they can go
to their friends or their colleagues or
their family and be like yeah here's x y
and z reason why my relationship isn't
going to work here's what i need in the
future here's where that doesn't align
in my relationship but then they will
continue this pattern of being in really
chaotic relationships because if they
are always activated in their anxious
attachment system when they're with
their partner they're not thinking about
the logic when they're making decisions
about their relationship so it can be
this kind of split where people who know
the fearful avoidance kind of feel like
i know this person to be very rational
and self-aware and measured but for some
reason they just keep making these
decisions that are kind of the opposite
of what they talk about wanting so from
the outside it can look very bizarre
like why is this person continuously
choosing something that they can sit in
front of me and tell me makes them
miserable it's because when they're
discussing the situation they might be
deactivated and relying solely on
distorted logic where they believe
feelings don't matter and only what
makes sense is what's important but then
when they're activated they're making
decisions from distorted emotion where
they're thinking logic doesn't matter i
just have to follow my heart at all
costs because it feels so intense when
i'm in the moment so of course the path
to healing for the fearful avoidant
becomes integrating these things and
recognizing even when you're really
emotionally activated it might not be
the time to make a decision you might
want to make a decision at a point where
you're able to factor in both how you
feel and what makes sense and find the
average of those things over a long
period of time and i really do think
that when it comes to attachment healing
for the fearful avoidant it takes a very
long time to be able to integrate those
world views and so it might be
worthwhile for a period of time to
decide like i'm not going to make any
decisions right now i'm going to wait
and try to stay conscious so that when
i'm emotionally activated i can remind
myself there's a rational part of this
that i'm currently neglecting to think
about and when i am deactivated i can
remind myself there is a strong
emotional component to this that at this
moment i'm neglecting to think about and
over time you can learn to bring those
things together and like the secure
person factor them both in have an
internal negotiation about what makes
the most sense for you at this point
given these seemingly conflicting
interests and then figure out how to
take an average of what you want as
opposed to ricocheting from one extreme
to the other sign number six that you
might have a fearful avoidant attachment
style you are highly aware of power
dynamics at all times now we have
already talked a little bit about this
when it comes to when the fearful
avoidant will and will not open up but
this is an important one because from a
very young age fearful avoidance kind of
learned you have to be strategic in your
approach to people right they have that
negative view of self negative view of
others so they tend to have this belief
that at the root of every single
relationship is an inherent power
struggle now i want to contrast this
with how the secure person looks at
relationships which is of course
everybody has their own interests at
heart and everyone is looking out for
themselves but people have lots of
opportunity for healthy and happy
collaboration and people are capable of
making each other's lives better by
compromising and prioritizing each other
because each person brings something
special to the other's life but because
the fearful avoidant kind of looks at
relationships as like i can keep my
center of gravity or i can hand over my
center of gravity and they don't
understand that you can keep most of
your center of gravity but outsource
like 25 of it so that you can flow
interpersonally in relationships they're
always kind of on the lookout for like
who has the greatest hold over a given
situation whether that is in a
friendship a work relationship a
romantic relationship it is always
present and always in the back of their
minds and again this is how they choose
when to open up when to self-disclose
when to start trusting people for the
fearful avoidant because they have such
an inherent sense of distrust in other
people the kind of closest that they get
to trust really is the feeling of it
would hurt you to betray me right so if
they can see that someone else's
interests are aligned with theirs to the
point where it would be harmful for the
other person to betray them because it
would cause a cascade effect that would
topple back on them that's kind of like
the closest a fearful avoidant who is
unhealed comes to trusting someone is
the recognition that like we're aligned
in such a way that you hurting me would
hurt you so now i can relax a little bit
and hand over some of my center of
gravity to you but if that is not
present if there's someone who they
perceive to have their own interests at
heart and not the fearful avoidance they
are highly unlikely to be trusting and
on the flip side they're always going to
be kind of looking for like leverage
points what do i have that someone else
wants what does someone have that i want
what might someone be trying to get out
of me what am i trying to get out of
other people so they can be hyper aware
both of what they have to offer that
other people might want and vice versa
and that again is not conscious it might
not even be something that consciously
enters their awareness at any point but
it will come out in terms of who they
feel comfortable around versus who they
feel a little bit more on edge around
and who they don't want to relax around
that's often a situation where they feel
like the power dynamic is shifted out of
my favor and so i have to pull back and
make sure i'm keeping my own center of
gravity close right this can actually
i'm getting a little bit off topic but
this can actually be how the fearful
avoidance feels when they're very
attracted to someone especially if they
don't know if that feeling of attraction
is mutual they might feel a little bit
consistently on edge because they're
kind of like oh i can tell that i want
your approval but you don't necessarily
want my approval so unlike the anxiously
attached person who in that case might
feel like okay well i'll go show that
person that i can give them things that
i can add to their lives that i can be
very loving and warm and maybe they'll
start to approve of me the fearful
avoidant might be like okay i have to
figure out how to be good enough for
that person in some objective way so
that they come to me so that the power
dynamic starts tipping in my favor once
i know they're attracted to me and then
i can open up and get to know them so
it's kind of this constant game of like
not wanting to go first and so if the
fearful avoidant wants something from
someone they have to figure out how to
shift the power dynamic in such a way
that they won't be losing control by
pursuing something with that person sign
number seven you might have a fearful
avoidant attachment style you have a
hard time making decisions because your
feelings are very inconsistent now this
is once again a theme that we've kind of
gone over quite a bit in this video but
i really want you to think about how
disorienting it is to only really be in
touch with either your reactive
emotional side or your cold kind of
calculating logical side at a time and i
think that as the fearful avoidant gets
older and they start to recognize their
own patterning a little bit more and
really see what's happening in terms of
that ricochet between the emotional side
of their lives and the more logical
controlled side of their lives they can
develop a really great self-awareness
around this and start to understand just
because i feel like i really want
something right now i might not feel the
same a week from now a month from now a
year from now and so they can at least
begin to acknowledge i have a very
chaotic experience of how i make choices
and so i might want to wait a really
long time to kind of make sure that
something i'm thinking about doing is
something that i'm going to feel
consistently aligned with right but that
requires them being able to keep that
awareness even in the moments when
they're feeling really strongly about
something and that's very difficult and
there can also be this case of almost
not pseudo self-awareness but where they
can kind of recognize parts of
themselves but forget how it feels in
the moment to play out those parts of
themselves so let's say you'll have a
fearful avoidant going into like a
career path where they're like i'm going
to be a public speaker or something
because i know i have these deep
emotions and i have a lot of wisdom to
share but then they get to the point in
their career where they would have to
actually be vulnerable actually show up
in a way that they find to be a bit
scary because they're not sure that the
power dynamic is tipped in their favor
and then they're gonna freak out
deactivate go back into avoidance mode
and suddenly feel very kind of cold and
closed off and like they can't pursue
that path and so there can be like
enough self-awareness that they believe
they can do it all like i can have a
career or a relationship that combines
emotion and rationality but they forget
that they're not necessarily choosing
when they show up with emotion and
emotional awareness and when they show
up with logic and reason and so again
until that integration starts to happen
and they can do both at once it can be
really difficult if they commit to
anything that requires them to access a
certain part of their personality on a
daily basis including relationships
right so there can sometimes be this
sense with the fearful avoidance of like
i can't trust myself because a decision
i make one day i might wake up a week
from now and just be like i cannot
access the part of myself that i thought
was going to be able to do that and so
in the long term you might learn to
distrust yourself and really feel like i
can't make good decisions for my life
i'm constantly in personal or
interpersonal chaos because i might make
promises to people in good faith and
then freak out and not be able to keep
them but not know why and again it's
because you're having that ricochet
between your anxious activation
strategies and your avoidant
deactivation strategies so you don't
always know which you you're gonna get a
week from now a month from now a year
from now and that makes it very
difficult to plan your life because
often the plans that you make in good
faith whether that's looking at someone
and saying yes i will absolutely commit
to this relationship or whether that's
staring down yourself in your more
deactivated periods and going i'm going
to clean up my act and get really
emotionally healthy and i'm not going to
give in to these strong emotions anymore
you are not factoring in the other side
so the more you become aware of that
inner disorientation the more difficult
you might find it to make major
decisions because you just don't know
what you can and can't depend on
yourself to follow through on sign
number eight that you might have a
fearful avoidant attachment style you
read other people really easily so this
one can be a really big pro right a lot
of fearful avoidance are really into
people-oriented fields where being able
to really deeply understand and unpack
the human psyche is an imperative to
that field or they'll bring that
awareness into other fields right i know
one fearful avoidant person who became
one of the best poker players in the
world because they were so good at
reading my new facial expressions on
other people and little subconscious
like ticks and tells that they had that
they were able to use that information
to become exceptional at telling when
other people were lying or bluffing so
this can be a really cool skill even
though it formed because of a
maladaptive environment so basically
early on for the fearful avoidance they
learned that what other people say is
not always accurate is not always true
so i have to learn to watch for all
types of information that might lead me
on to what someone is thinking or
feeling now where this differs from the
anxious strategy because the anxiously
attached person does also have that
hyper vigilance around others behavior
is that the anxious person can get kind
of blinded by their idealization of
other people whereas the fearful
avoidant that can happen for they can
have a lot of limerence they can't
idealize people the same way the anxious
does but where the fearful avoidance
kind of has the advantage here is that
they're a lot more comfortable looking
at the negative parts of themselves so
often with an anxiously attached person
it's really difficult for them to admit
to themselves when let's say they're
being manipulative or they're trying to
get something out of someone else but
the fearful avoidant is a lot more
comfortable admitting to themselves i'm
being strategic i'm being manipulative
here so it's easier for them to also
spot when other people are doing those
things right so they tend to be pretty
good at understanding how the power
dynamics are playing out in a given
situation what people's motivations are
and why and when people might lie or
show up dishonestly as well as which
delusions people might be holding about
themselves right because they have that
ability to kind of switch back and forth
between the anxious side of things where
they do feel like at times they're
seeing the world through rose-colored
glasses they're idealizing people
they're fantasizing and inventing
stories in their head and then going
into that deactivation mode where now
they're recognizing all of that stuff
that they do for what it is they have
both sides of the spectrum right they
can see the areas in which other people
are deluding themselves over relying on
emotion or under relying on emotion and
having thought distortions because
they've accessed both sides of that
spectrum ironically the only people that
fearful avoidance tend to be really bad
at reading are secure people who are
operating from a place of i'm okay i
have empathy for myself and trust in
others and that mindset is so foreign to
the fearful avoidance that they might
kind of feel like come on like what's
your game plan like what strategy are
you using here when they meet a securely
attached person who's not using a
strategy they are just truly being
honest and showing up authentically in
their interactions with people but it's
difficult for the fearful avoidant to
believe that someone doesn't have a
strategy because
they were raised in an environment where
to survive you really had to have
interpersonal strategies sign number
nine that you might have a fearful
avoidant attachment style you are
frequently upregulated and you might
even be addicted to emotional highs now
this can be true of any of the insecure
styles so fearful avoidant avoidant and
anxious are all going to try to regulate
themselves in kind of counterproductive
ways at times but what happens
specifically for the fearful avoidant is
that they have both the need for
emotional intensity that the anxious
style has which means they often put
themselves in situations that are very
emotionally volatile
but they also have the inability to
handle and process and be vulnerable
about negative emotions that the
avoidant style has so when the anxious
style puts themselves in these like
emotionally intense volatile situations
they often deal with their negative
emotions by seeking out support by going
to friends or family members or their
partners and asking for co-regulation
but the fearful avoidant doesn't
understand it's not really in their
psyche in the same way that other people
can help you with your problems and help
change the way that you're feeling so
they'll put themselves in these kind of
emotionally intense situations and feel
deep pain or deep grief when something
goes wrong but they don't know how to
co-regulate properly so they don't
necessarily feel comfortable being
vulnerable about what they're going
through with other people so what they
do is they try to make themselves feel
better by balancing out that extreme
pain with an extreme emotional high and
this can look very different depending
on the person depending on the pain and
again all of the styles will choose
unhealthy coping mechanisms in certain
situations but with the fearful avoidant
you will often see kind of an entire
lifestyle that is oriented in a slightly
more extravagant than normal way like
they might have a breakup and they need
to go like travel the world for six
months they can't sit with their pain
but they feel it right as opposed to
let's say the anxious style who might go
through a breakup and they feel that
pain like it is really intense and raw
for them but
as soon as they find someone else like a
new partner or even a really comforting
friend who can be really present with
them they're able to move on from that
pain actually a lot quicker in most
cases because they do process it even
though it feels so overwhelming and so
unbearable at the time and with the
avoidant they're not good at dealing
with negative emotions but they tend to
put themselves in less situations than
the fearful avoidant and anxious style
that would cause them to get really hurt
right because they don't do that
vulnerability they don't do that kind of
enmeshment in relationships so they're
less likely to be experiencing that
level of emotional pain in the first
place but with the fearful avoidant they
tend to put themselves in very
emotionally triggering situations than
not know how to deal with the triggers
in a healthy way and so they might need
to chase some extreme high extreme
ambitious goal because they need a
distraction from their pain when they
feel it they can't just sit with it now
to an extent once again all of the
styles that are insecure will do this
gabor mate actually wrote a wonderful
book called scattered minds where he
talks about the connection between adhd
or inattentive thinking in general and
disorganization of the attachment system
and i also want to point out that we see
things like substance abuse issues and
mental health challenges represented
across the range of insecure styles so
it's not that the fearful avoidant is
the only one who deals with pain
maladaptively it's just that there is
this specific pattern where they
experience pain kind of on the same
level as the anxious style but their
ability to co-regulate is similar to
that of the avoidance so they have to
constantly try to find ways to make
themselves feel better from this pain
that they believe is being inflicted
upon them by interpersonal situations
and that is a really hard thing to do so
that's why we often see these kind of
extreme attempts to make themselves feel
better by chasing these really big highs
all right last sign sign number 10 that
you might have a fearful avoidant
attachment style is that you love really
hard but you struggle to make room for
the other person in your life so fearful
avoidance is really characterized by a
need for control you are afraid of what
will happen if you let go of control
over your own life your own routines the
things that you want for yourself but
you want that intimacy that comfort of
having another person you can go to and
share your life with so whereas the
anxious style is a lot more willing to
make compromises and to really kind of
figure out how they and their partner
can fit their lives together because
again their sense of self and their
emotional self kind of exists outside of
the self anyways so they don't have that
much that they're trying to hold on to
in terms of their independent needs and
identity they kind of feel like well i'm
half of a whole so i'm looking for my
other half but the fearful avoidant
feels like i am a whole i'm fine on my
own they tend to think that they can
live their lives alone and a lot of them
will stay out of relationships for very
long periods of time that's another kind
of clear distinction between fearful
avoidant and anxious anxiously attached
people tend to feel very uncomfortable
out of relationships they can like force
themselves to be single and white
knuckle through it but they tend to feel
more comfortable in a relationship the
fearful avoidance tends to feel like
they are the most themselves the most
regulated the most calm when they are on
their own but then they want that
intimacy right they feel themselves
wanting a hit of closeness so what
they'll try to do is form a romantic
relationship that does not force them to
compromise in any capacity
and this is also how the avoidant acts
however the avoidant isn't looking for
the same degree of emotional intensity
right so they might have relationships
that kind of look a little bit more
transactional on the surface because
they truly are because they truly are
just looking for someone who they don't
have to go super deep with but the
fearful avoidant wants the experience of
emotionally being as close to someone as
you would in like a long-term committed
romantic relationship but they don't
want to give up control over the way
that they're running their life and all
of the hobbies and interests and
patterns and routines that they have
formed for themselves around that
internal sense of gravity so partners of
fearful avoidance can often feel like
they have to kind of constantly give in
to what the fearful avoidant wants
because they can be kind of rigid and
uncompromising in relationships but they
want that emotional intimacy right and
this can lead to some controlling
behavior all the insecurely attached
types are controlling in their own ways
so basically like anxiously attached
people can try to get their partner to
do certain things and act certain ways
towards them and show up in certain ways
that give them a steady stream of
validation regardless of whether or not
that is authentic for their partner and
then the avoidantly attached person can
kind of refuse to compromise to the
extent where their partner always feels
like they have to be showing up and
doing everything the way the avoidant
person wants it because the avoidant is
just so unwilling to change their ways
and this is also true of the fearful
avoidant but the difference is that they
want a much higher degree of emotional
intensity than the avoidant wants so
they're more motivated to be a little
bit more controlling over their partners
the way an anxiously attached person
might because they're trying to keep
that person in their orbit without
compromising where their center of
gravity is they haven't learned how to
compromise how to understand what's
important to them and what's not so
there can be this tendency to like get
super enmeshed in a relationship maybe
in the early to middle stages of the
relationship and then pull back and be
like well if we're doing this long term
if we're committing to each other here's
what i need for my life you can fit
yourself to that or not but i'm not
going to make major compromises and that
is a defensive strategy that they don't
realize they're doing but it really does
stem from that fear of like i can't let
my center of gravity go permanently and
they don't know like the secure person
knows i can know what i want and show up
for myself and give myself the things i
want and also choose to devote a certain
amount of time and energy and attention
to growing a relationship with someone
because that adds a great deal to my
life and sometimes it's worth giving up
certain things that i would do if i were
on my own in order to get the benefits
of sharing my life with someone and the
overall average of that can be happier
than the overall average of living my
life alone but again that process of
being able to integrate what you want
emotionally and what logically makes
sense is not something that comes
naturally to the fearful avoidance so
they have to really put conscious and
intentional work into making that
integration happen over a long period of
time in order to start healing from this
style all right that is all i have to
say today about the fearful avoidance
attachment style i hope that this video
was helpful for you guys at least in
starting to understand the distinctions
between why all of the different styles
do the things that they do right very
often the behavior overlaps when it
comes to fearful avoidant anxious and
avoidant attachment styles but the
motivation for that behavior is very
different depending on the style and the
fearful avoidance definitely has the
most disorientation
in terms of what their motivations are
right they're constantly kind of
reacting to like the polarized demands
of their own mind now there are many
different theories on fearful avoidance
and in future videos i'm going to talk
about in particular the dynamic
maturation model of attachment which
talks about how disorganized attachment
systems actually have a high degree of
organization to them we just haven't
studied them intricately enough until
the dmm came along to really understand
what the disorganized individual is
aiming for so in the dmm a lot of people
who would be classified as disorganized
in the traditional model of attachment
would actually be classified differently
in this model so that's a really
interesting one that we're going to
explore in future videos but for now i
wanted to give an overview of what it
feels like internally to have a fearful
avoidant attachment style and remind you
that healing is so possible the
brilliance of attachment styles is that
we always have the opportunity if we are
willing and able to do the work to move
towards security so fearful avoidance
can get so much better if you are living
with a lot of these signs and symptoms
of fearful avoidance and life feels very
difficult for you i promise you it can
get so
so much easier if you're willing to show
up and do the work so if you want to see
more videos like this and if you want to
start talking about how to heal your
attachment style make sure you subscribe
to this channel i put out videos almost
daily at this point where we talk about
personality types attachment styles and
everything else that kind of goes into
the kaleidoscope of who you are as a
person and how you show up in the world
alright until next time i love you guys
i hope you're taking care of yourselves
and i will see you back here again soon
[Music]