hey guys heidi prep here today i wanted
to talk about something that turned into
a little bit of a not a rant but a
conversation on my twitter where i was
talking about how i would not name the
attachment styles what they are named if
i were currently in charge of naming
them now obviously this is just because
i was not the original attachment
researcher i was not john volby or mary
ainsworth and the names that they gave
the attachment styles
i believe fit in a way at the time but
as language has evolved and as life has
gone on we have learned to associate
different terms with different things
especially terms like anxious or
avoidant and i think that those terms no
longer properly encapsulate what those
attachment styles are really about
however
what i wanted to talk about today was
the conversation that came out of that
consideration which is when i was
thinking about what i would name the
styles instead it kind of became
increasingly clear to me that something
gets left out of the attachment dialogue
quite a bit in that we talk about it but
we don't focus on it as a central
component of attachment and it really is
and what that thing is is our
relationship not just to each other not
just to our attachment figures but to
emotional pain
so how we process emotional pain is a
massive component of our attachment
styles and it's something that we don't
always directly address but a lot of the
behaviors that extend outward from our
attachment style are to do with the way
that we are regulating thinking about
and consciously interacting with the
pain that we feel in life now
first of all nobody is immune to pain
that is not a thing every human being
who's alive even psychopaths feel pain
about their own emotions so no one is
immune to emotional pain that's not an
option we get in life but the way that
we experience emotional pain is very
different person to person and one of
the biggest mediating factors in
relation to how we experience emotional
pain is our attachment system so one of
the questions that i get very often is
why does attachment style form so young
so our very early attachment responses
beneath the age of two or three are
highly predictive of the attachment
style that we will form as an adult so
while our attachment styles absolutely
grow and mature with us and develop
dynamically alongside us the reason why
early experiences are so important for
forming certain attachment styles is
because when we are under the age of two
or three our brains are developing so
quickly and we are learning so rapidly
and we are internalizing all of these
thoughts and ideas that will predispose
our brains to firing the same way over
and over again because that is how
learning works in the brain the
experiences that we have shape the way
the neurons fire in our brain and anyone
who's interacted with even a little bit
of pop psychology neurobiology knows
that neurons that fire together wire
together and what that means is that the
very early experiences that we have form
neural pathways in our brain that get
repeated over and over again in life so
our brain literally forms around the
early experiences that we have now that
doesn't mean that those neural pathways
are set in stone as we grow up if we
apply conscious and deliberate effort to
changing our attachment system we can do
it with the help of a professional who
understands how to rewire our minds to
start thinking about attachment
differently however if we don't
consciously attack our attachment style
at a young age which most of us do not
our brains literally develop around
certain ways of processing and thinking
and one of the main things that we learn
to process very early on is emotional
distress and pain so like we've talked
about in previous videos attachment
styles form because the behaviors that
go along with them were once very
adaptive for us so for example let's
look at the dismiss of avoidant i don't
love the term avoidant actually for the
avoidant attachment style because to
avoid something we have to first be
consciously aware of it and we have to
choose to dismiss it and to focus on
something else and in the case of the
dismissive avoidant that is actually not
what's happening that's actually more
similar to what's happening for the
anxious preoccupied type or the fearful
avoidant when they're trying to
consciously not think about
relationships they might be consciously
trying to avoid distressing thoughts
about them however with the dismissive
avoidant it's more often the case that
distressing emotionally painful thoughts
don't enter their awareness in the first
place okay because from a very young age
they learned to dismiss those thoughts
and focus more intently on other
thoughts because this is what was
adaptive for them at an early age so
when you have someone who is let's say
for lack of a better term just a little
bit avoidant so there is a spectrum
right you can have someone who is
extremely avoiding you can have someone
who is almost secure but just a little
bit on the avoidant side of things and
for those people what may have happened
when they were very young children is
that their parents weren't necessarily
abusive they wouldn't necessarily hit
them or be outwardly cruel to them if
they showed a negative emotion but it's
highly likely that the parent would
respond in some subtle way
negatively to the child's display of
negative emotions so often this happens
when you have an avoidant parent
themselves who for their entire life has
learned to suppress negative emotions so
now when their baby shows a negative
emotion they might either get a little
bit stressed out because they don't know
how to respond to it or they might show
a little bit of subtle contempt or
hostility towards the child for
displaying a negative emotion and the
child will learn through operant
conditioning that my parent responds
best to me when i show my parent happy
emotions when i show my parent that i am
okay i am regulated and when i go up and
maybe make a funny joke at them or when
i do something that i know they want me
to do so this child learns to dismiss
their negative emotions not because they
think it makes them tough or because
they consciously see the survival value
of it but because they have just learned
in a very primitive very simplistic way
negative emotions don't get me what i
want but displaying positive emotions or
at the least suppressing my negative
emotions and not focusing too much on
them does get me what i want which is
access to my caregivers warmth and
attention and so as they grow up they
develop a consistent pattern of not
valuing the information that their
negative emotions are providing them
with so if they have a negative thought
avoidant types tend to be quite quick to
either reframe to focus on something
else their brain kind of naturally just
re-routes to a thought that they believe
is more productive so these are often
the people who as soon as they have a
problem they just want to fix it they
don't want to dwell on it they don't
want to think about their emotions
related to it they just want to find a
solution and this is not because they
have consciously dismissed their
negative emotions it does not mean that
they have felt this overwhelming sense
of sadness and pain and decided i'm not
going to focus on that it could be to an
extent but it's more likely that as soon
as that emotion comes up their brain
automatically does a redirect and goes
okay what's the solution what's the
answer let's get cracking they actually
can find it very difficult to access and
to sit with their negative emotions it's
just not as conscious for them and as
accessible to them as it is for people
who are either secure or anxious now you
can also have someone who is more
avoidant so further down on the kind of
avoidantly attached spectrum and this is
often not always but often children who
grew up in more dangerous environments
so children who had caregivers who were
predictably hostile and outwardly either
abusive or aggressive towards them when
they showed negative emotion so these
children really learned to suppress
those negative emotions because it was
not only unpleasant and useless for them
to feel them it was actually dangerous
for them to feel them so as these types
of avoidantly attached people grow up
they really learn to suppress things
both unconsciously and consciously and
they might actually get angry when they
see other people expressing their
emotions because for them it was never
safe they were never allowed to do that
and so it feels unfair that other people
are expressing their emotions and it's
safe and fine and okay for them when the
avoidant has spent so much of their life
learning to keep themselves okay and
regulated and tough so that they weren't
in danger so these types of avoidance
might actually develop a little bit of
an ego around their ability to suffer
without complaint so these are more
likely to be the people who consciously
like to think of themselves as very
tough very capable and they might take a
little bit of pleasure in looking down
on people who don't match their level of
toughness they almost never recognize
what was done to them as a child as
abuse they tend to idealize one or both
of their parent figures or at the least
excuse them and go they were just
teaching me a lesson they were just
giving me tough love so you get this
very kind of tough exterior right and
that is not them consciously choosing to
be that way it is truly the way that
their neurology wired as a child to keep
themselves safe we prioritize
information that is valuable and we
dismiss information that is not valuable
and if you are consistently rejected
beat up abused every time you show
negative emotion you learn very quickly
very young showing negative emotion is
not useful showing perseverance
toughness inability to stand up for
myself and get what i need for myself is
useful and so that's what these type of
avoidance learn to prioritize so you can
kind of think of it like this imagine if
at a very young age something went wrong
in your brain that caused you to not
feel physical pain so there was
something off in your wiring and when
you put your hand on a hot stove you
don't know your hands on a hot stove
because you don't feel pain if you break
your leg you don't know your leg is
broken until you look down and see your
leg flopping around because you don't
feel physical pain now this might seem
like an advantage on the surface but
it's actually very debilitating because
physical pain is there to alert us to a
problem right it is a giant red flag
saying stop don't keep exerting pressure
on this area this needs to heal and rest
and the same is true of emotional pain
so it might seem attractive on the
surface to not feel much emotional pain
or to have your emotional pain receptors
so to speak kind of dulled the way that
avoidantly attached people do however
it's actually very maladaptive because
emotional pain like physical pain is in
our psyche to serve as a red flag it
tells us when to stop when the thing
that we're doing is not right for us
when it's leading us down a bad path it
alerts us to red flags in relationships
with other people and so emotional pain
is something that is actually quite
important to have and to be aware of and
to be able to process and i'm going to
make a whole video on this because i
think it's a really important topic
where i discuss in depth the value of
sensitizing yourself to emotional pain
as an avoidant or an avoidant spectrum
type and how we can work with emotional
pain to make better decisions and to
think more effectively but this video is
just about familiarizing ourselves with
the different attachment styles
experiences of pain so this also kind of
accounts for something that can feel
frustrating for other people in
relationship with avoidance right
because avoidance have kind of dulled
emotional pain receptors but they don't
know that that's the case they think
that everybody experiences pain on the
same level they can get very impatient
when other people are expressing
emotional pain all the time because in
their minds if it doesn't feel that bad
for them when a given thing happens it
must be true that for other people it
also doesn't feel that bad so when they
see someone complaining about something
or acting like they are in extreme
emotional pain over a situation that the
avoidant would truly not feel that much
emotional pain over it's very easy to
assume that that other person is
exaggerating or that they are trying to
get something out of crying and making a
show of their pain because the avoidant
doesn't automatically know that they're
wired differently than other people they
don't know that other people are
actually feeling much more conscious
pain than they are so it can be very
easy to get frustrated to believe that
everyone else is exaggerating as an
avoidant type but your healing journey
lies in learning to sensitize yourself
to emotional pain and understanding what
a healthy amount of it is as well as how
to work with it healthily we're not
trying to make you into an emotional
mess we're not trying to make you into
someone who cannot regulate themselves
we're just trying to reach a place where
our emotions are available enough to us
to access that we can start working with
the entire range of emotions not just
the few that early on in life we deemed
very important now the anxiously
attached type so the anxiously attached
type had kind of the opposite experience
of the avoidant type very early in life
in that their parents were often
responsive to their negative displays of
emotion but they were not consistently
responsive so what that means is that
when the anxious baby would cry when
they would show that they were upset
when they would display vulnerability as
all babies are apt to do we are
literally wired to do those things
sometimes their parent would respond to
them and sometimes their parent would
not be as available or as responsive and
so again human instinct kicks in and
what do babies do when that's the case
they cry louder they follow their parent
into the next room they try to show with
increasing intensity i need help when
you're a baby you absolutely do need
help you cannot solve your own survival
problems when you're an infant but these
are the babies who had to work a little
bit harder to consistently get their
parents attention so they learned as
soon as i feel upset or anxious or like
i need something i have to really
amplify my expression of that experience
in order to get the best chance at my
parent responding so as soon as the
anxiously attached person feels a
negative emotion there is this deeply
ingrained deeply hardwired response in
them to instantly bring it to the
attention of those who love them because
they believe that if they bring it to
other people's attention and if they
bring it emphatically enough to other
people's attention someone will
eventually show up to help soothe their
pain now in some situations this is a
perfectly healthy response we all need
people we all need each other
co-regulation is very much a part of
secure relationships as well however
what's different from the secure
response and the anxious response is
that securely attached individuals
usually at a very young age had
emotional first aid so to speak modeled
for them so the parent didn't just
soothe them they also displayed and
modeled healthy emotional coping skills
so as the secure child grows up they
watch their parents access uncomfortable
emotions like pain and distress and
discomfort and they watch how their
parents move through those emotions and
they learn to do the same thing
themselves but with the anxiously
attached child what you often get is a
child who doesn't have a parent figure
who models healthy emotional regulation
for them so they never really learn how
to soothe their own distress they never
really learn how to calm down when
they're upset or when they're angry or
when they're stressed and so as a result
they learn if i need to stop feeling a
negative emotion i need to find someone
else to soothe me and then we get this
perpetual experience of the anxiously
attached person trying to find a partner
who they believe will be able to meet
all of their needs as soon as their
needs come up now that isn't consciously
how it feels for the anxiously attached
person how it consciously feels is like
they just get very invested very quickly
like they really want to be around their
partner a lot of the time and then they
start to get anxious if they see signs
that their partner might not be as
invested or their partner might not be
as readily available to them as they
would like but this would not be a
problem if they had the ability to
self-soothe for example insecure
relationships partners like to spend a
lot of time together that's very normal
but they can also separate and do their
own thing without much anxiety because
both know i'm okay when i'm with my
partner and i'm okay when i'm not with
my partner because if something happens
that upsets me i know how to soothe
myself it might be nice to have someone
else there with me to help me work
through it but if that's not possible
i'm perfectly capable of working through
my emotions on my own and this is where
the anxiously attached person struggles
so whereas the avoidant person kind of
has dulled pain receptors the anxiously
attached person is missing the mechanism
that makes pain stop so imagine if every
time you stubbed your toe you just went
on feeling pain until someone else fixed
your toe for you imagine if every time
you got a headache you would just keep
having a headache with increasing
intensity until someone else came along
and fixed your headache for you you
would start to get a little bit anxious
about always having someone around and
available to you because what if you
hurt yourself and then you will be in
pain and the pain will just keep getting
worse and worse and worse until someone
shows up to stop it and that's kind of
what it's like to be anxiously attached
if you emotionally hurt yourself in any
way and you don't know how to
self-regulate you need someone around
preferably as soon as possible in order
to help you soothe your pain so let's
say you're in a partnership where you
live with your partner and everything's
great when they're there but now they
need to go away for a week for work your
brain might start getting really really
anxious even if you intellectually know
i'm perfectly fine with my partner going
away for a week that's totally allowed
and there's a very valid reason why
they're going your brain might start
getting really anxious because without
you consciously being aware of this your
brain is freaked out that if you feel
emotional pain there won't be someone
around to help you regulate it so the
reason why i don't like the term anxious
attachment is because anxiety is not
actually the core of the problem the
core of the problem is an inability to
regulate pain among a few other things
so if i were renaming the attachment
styles i think i would call avoidant
attachment something along the lines of
like oblivious attachment like they are
not conscious of their own need for
comfort for attachment for
interdependence and i would call the
anxious attachment something like
obsessive attachment because the
conscious experience of the anxiously
attached person is that they can have
obsessive thoughts about relationships
and the availability of their partner
because again they're trying to mitigate
that pain or maybe we could call it
something along the lines of like
perpetual pain preoccupation i don't
know definitely do not allow me to
rename the styles it would not be like
catchy names but what i'm getting at
here is that our attachment systems are
very much centered around to an extent
our ability to regulate emotion and to
manage emotional pain if you are fearful
avoidant you will do a mix of both of
these strategies and that will be very
confusing because you will for example
feel like you're not feeling any pain
for a long period of time maybe you have
dulled pain receptors in some parts of
your brain but then all of a sudden
something might happen that leaves you
in screaming emotional pain and you will
absolutely need someone instantly to
come help you soothe it and you won't
really understand what happened the
other people won't really understand
what happened and it will make for a
very confusing experience because the
fearful avoidance is constantly kind of
trying to work out who am i am i a
person who's really tough and who can
handle a lot or am i a person who really
needs other people and who is overly
invested and attached in relationships
and often they ricochet between those
two extremes based on what triggers are
happening for them at a given point in
time so this is a very disorienting
experience both for the fearful avoidant
and for the person dating them and so
the route to healing for the fearful
avoidant is doing a little bit of each
figuring out where your pain receptors
are not functioning properly where
they've been dulled and then sensitizing
yourself to the areas in which you are
feeling emotional pain in your body but
not processing it consciously
as well as learning to regulate your
emotions around the areas where you do
feel constant and conscious screaming
emotional pain so it's double the work
if you're a fearful avoidant but it's
also by definition double the reward if
you end up earning secure attachment in
the end all right that is all i have to
say for today again i'm gonna follow up
with videos that talk more about how
these things show up for each of the
individual attachment styles not
necessarily soon but in the coming
months for sure so stay tuned for those
and in the comments let me know what's
resonated for you in this video what
your experience is or has been of
emotional pain and any other aha moments
that maybe you've had or are starting to
have about your own attachment system
all right i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and i will see
you back here again soon
[Music]