hey guys heidi preeb here welcome back
to my channel if you are not new here
welcome to my channel if you are on this
channel we talk about attachment theory
myers-briggs personality types and any
other theories that help us understand
ourselves and other people better this
week we're talking about something
that's very specific which is the three
insecure attachment styles and in which
situations insecure strategies are
actually adaptive so when i say insecure
strategies there's a reason why i'm
differentiating that from attachment
styles so attachment styles are kind of
these categories that we group people
into based on which attachment
strategies they're using the strategies
themselves are describing the behaviors
that we've internalized and learned to
use in order to get our attachment needs
met so whether you are secure avoidant
anxious or fearful avoidant there is a
specific strategy that you are using in
order to get your attachment needs met
and if you are insecurely attached that
strategy is generally formed around
getting your attachment needs met
without having to explicitly state what
they are so what differentiates the
secure style is that they tend to be
quite open and honest about what their
needs are and they expect that their
needs will be met by other people if
they're to state them calmly and clearly
and this is often true because the
securely attached person tends to
prioritizing forming relationships with
other securely attached people who live
interdependently and who are very open
and responsive to each other's needs now
what differentiates an insecure strategy
is that because insecure strategies were
formed in environments where explicitly
in directing stating what your needs are
did not get your needs met but more
often than not it got you rejected and
it worked against getting your needs met
if you have an insecure attachment
strategy it means that you learned a
strategy when you were very young around
how to get your needs met by lying
distorting or omitting pieces of
information in your environment and
acting as though things were different
than they actually are now this was the
perfect strategy for you when you were
young if you are growing up in a home
where emotional openness where intimacy
and where authenticity are repeatedly
rejected by your caregivers the smart
most adaptive thing to do is to learn to
inhibit what you truly feel and to
exaggerate things that you don't truly
feel in order to get your needs met now
babies cannot be manipulative that's one
thing i want to clear up right away
adults can be manipulative babies do not
yet have the mental capacities to be
manipulative they are solely doing
whatever works to get their needs met
they're learning through the process of
trial and error so if a baby cries or if
a baby goes to its parent and asks for
something and the parent rejects or
punishes the child for acting that way
that child learns through the process of
operant conditioning that does not work
let me try something else and then maybe
the child goes to the parent and
expresses a different emotion to the one
that they're actually feeling and that
emotion the parent is very respondent to
and they end up giving the child what
the child needs despite the fact that
the child did not explicitly ask for
that the child doesn't know that what
they're doing is manipulating all their
clocking is oh that worked so i'll do it
again the next time i have that same
need right it's the process of learning
what works and what doesn't and that's
how we form our early attachment
strategies we notice what works we
notice what doesn't work and then we
repeat what does and we don't repeat
what doesn't the problem is that if you
grew up in an environment where the only
way to get your needs met was to lie
about what your needs are and pretend
that you have different needs than you
actually have you will grow up to
continue to use a strategy that is as an
adult with more complex thinking skills
manipulative and maladaptive in many
ways and when it comes to the fearful
avoidant attachment strategy in
particular adults using this strategy
often find that they're not quite
getting what they want out of life using
this strategy but they have never
learned a different way so this video is
going to be all about unpacking why your
strategy once worked as a fearful
avoidant how to recognize the situations
in which it's no longer working but also
the situations in which it is currently
still working for you because the latter
is actually going to be the more
difficult part of your attachment
strategy to change the areas where we
can actively see that there is chaos and
upheaval in our lives as a result of the
attachment strategy that we're using we
are going to be naturally motivated to
approach and to fix but the areas where
our life is functioning well and quite
effectively based on the attachment
strategy that is unhealthy but adaptive
is going to be the areas where we need
to do the most work so i want to take a
moment and talk about the difference
between adaptive and healthy so
something can be adaptive meaning it
gets us what we want or what we need out
of the specific situation that we're in
but that same thing can be unhealthy in
the long term and this is the case for
most people when it comes to insecure
attachment strategies when you were very
young the strategy that you learned was
the absolute perfect strategy for the
specific and unique home environment
that you grew up in however as an adult
that same strategy might be causing you
an immense amount of distress an immense
amount of turbulence an immense amount
of interpersonal conflict and it might
be very negatively impacting your mental
emotional and physical well-being what's
adaptive in one situation can also be
unhealthy in the long term but before
you can understand what a healthier
long-term response would look like you
have to understand the environment that
you are adapted to
so the fearful avoidant attachment
strategy is a complicated one to explain
because it encompasses a lot of
different things and a lot of it is
often thought to be more trauma response
than attachment system response if that
makes sense so what i mean by that is
that when you have an avoidant
attachment style you're only looking at
the way that you're orienting your
worldview around relationships and the
same is true of the anxious attachment
strategy so it's about looking at those
two different world views and how they
approach attachment relationships based
on the biases that they both have with
the fearful avoidant attachment style
there are many different theories on how
fearful avoidant attachment develops but
one of the theories is that essentially
you have a base attachment strategy
whether that is avoidant or anxious and
then you have trauma so you might get
triggered and have the opposite response
come up disorganizing the system of
attachment that you have and use in most
situations so let's say most of the time
your base strategy involves downplaying
your negative emotions pretending that
you're not feeling what you're really
feeling and learning to regulate
yourself in a way that dismisses what
your emotional experience truly is but
every once in a while you get triggered
you have a traumatic flashback come up
and in that situation you might suddenly
have this war that's happening between
this flashback which is orienting you to
let's say exaggerate your negative
emotion to really really state your case
maybe overstate your case maybe become
aggressive and emotionally or physically
violent because suddenly it's like you
can't hold it in anymore so you might
have a base attachment strategy that is
avoidant and you might have triggers
that come up semi-regularly based on
trauma that spiral you into something
that looks more like an anxious
attachment response or the opposite
could be true right so let's say your
base response is anxious and you tend to
focus heavily on your negative emotions
communicate them heavily and really feel
like you struggle to self-regulate
without someone else helping you but you
might have a trauma response or a
trigger that can cause you to dissociate
that can cause you to cut yourself off
from other people and the more
frequently that happens the more it's
going to look like a fearful avoidance
strategy as opposed to a singular
strategy with intrusions of trauma now
there's another way to look at this
theory which is to say that those using
a fearful avoidant attachment strategy
in moments when their attachment system
is triggered so moments where you feel
threatened and you're looking for
protection and support you're not sure
which strategy is the appropriate one to
use in a given situation and that can be
very very true particularly of children
who grow up in environments that are
extremely volatile or potentially
abusive so when you experience a threat
generally your attachment system
activates when your attachment system
activates if you are anxious you seek
proximity to your caregiver if you are
secure you seek proximity to your
caregiver and if you are avoidant you
attempt to down regulate your emotional
experience and hope that protection will
be granted to you by you not making a
fuss now when you are fearful avoidant
what it generally means is that in the
situations in which you were one or two
years old and forming your attachment
strategies the source of the threat was
also your only opportunity for comfort
and protection from the threat so this
is often the case when we have parental
abuse right if a parent is threatening
you and you are scared for your life but
the only person who you believe could
protect you from threat is your parent
there's this response pattern that can
happen where you can freeze and not know
whether it's appropriate to move towards
your parent for protection or away from
them because you're threatened so that
can create what looks like this kind of
push-pull pattern where you aren't sure
if intimacy is soothing and protective
for you or if intimacy is scary and if
you ought to detach from it every time
you get close to it so there are
different ways to look at fearful
avoidance and all of them encapsulate i
believe some form of the greater picture
which is that this particular attachment
style is dealing with trauma and when
you're dealing with trauma there is not
a single and an easy answer to it
because everyone's trauma is different
and this is why i always highly
recommend unpacking your attachment
strategies with a professional who is
trauma informed specifically if you
identify as fearful avoidant but all of
that is to say there was once a
situation in which the strategy that you
now use as an adult in attachment
relationships was perfect and completely
adaptive for you and it's important to
note and give yourself validation for
the fact that if you were for example
being abused by a parent fearful
avoidant responses are the perfect
responses to have okay when you are a
child who feels threatened and the
person threatening you is also the
person who is sustaining your life and
giving you access to all of the
resources that you need in order to
continue your life it makes perfect
sense to sometimes fawn over that person
and sometimes detach and protect
yourself from that person based on how
that person is currently responding to
you fearful avoidance which means
getting caught between these two extreme
response patterns and constantly having
to make this assessment of which of
these insecure responses is the better
one to use in this situation is the
perfect response pattern when you are
trapped in an abusive situation now
here's where we want a caveat and say as
adults you are not necessarily trapped
in abusive patterns the same way that
you are as an infant even if you feel
trapped so what i mean by that is that
when you're an infant you truly don't
have the ability and the capability and
the resources to reach out and get help
the way that you would as an adult who's
trapped in an abusive situation this is
not to downplay the severity the
intensity and the difficulty that can
surround being in an abusive situation
as an adult but it is to say that you've
internalized a strategy that worked for
you when you were very young that might
still be working for you if you're in an
unhealthy environment as an adult but
what your mind missed along the way is
internalizing that there are other types
of situations you can be in so when it
comes to any of the insecure attachment
strategies part of the work is learning
to show up differently and behave
securely in the situations that you're
used to being in but the other half of
the work is recognizing the ways in
which you have perpetuated the
situations that you were born into and
now found yourself in similar
environments where the strategy that you
have works but the environment itself is
unhealthy so if you are used to abusive
or exploitive relationships and you're
constantly using a strategy that helps
you navigate those relationships you're
going to be more likely to find that the
way you operate in the world is
compatible with more exploitive or
unhealthy situations as an adult now
this is not at all a moral failing on
your part it is not something that you
are conscious of it's just the way that
our patterning works so we seek out
situations where what we know how to do
allows us to get what we need out of
that environment and so if what we know
how to do is navigate dishonesty and
manipulation the strategies that we have
are going to work best when we find
ourselves in exploitive and difficult
situations there's a book called the
betrayal bond that i read in the past
year that i don't think touches on this
specifically like i don't think that
they talk about attachment if i remember
correctly maybe they do at one point but
i thought that it was such a good
example of how the fearful avoidant
individual is adapted to unhealthy
environments and therefore as an adult
they tend to find themselves in a lot of
unhealthy situations and again the skill
set that you have as a fearful avoidant
which involves being incredibly
suspicious both of yourself and other
people of hiding your true emotions of
exaggerating emotions that are not true
for you of failing to trust people but
also failing to trust yourself because
again you often get triggered and when
we're triggered we tend to lose our
sense of inner security and calm and
behave in a way that we wouldn't
necessarily choose if we were
untriggered all of that stuff that
you've learned was adaptive for you
early on in life but the work lies in
realizing that it is not necessarily
adaptive anymore in that you now have
the option as an adult and it will take
a completely different set of skills to
get you here to put yourself in
situations that are healthy and i'm
going to say it again it will require a
new skill set you will have to acquire
ideally with a lot of professional help
the ability to trust yourself to show up
honestly to trust other people to learn
how to distinguish situations where you
can trust other people versus situations
where it's not safe to trust other
people and only then learning to trust
people in a situationally appropriate
way and eventually learning to live
interdependently rather than
continuously interacting with other
people who live in either
counter-dependent or co-dependent states
where communication is essentially
always geared towards getting something
out of the other person and honesty is
never the best strategy and there are
many many situations in life where this
is true right it's very easy to find
corrupt dishonest industries where your
specific skill set of being suspicious
of everyone and trusting nobody but
yourself and in some cases not even
yourself will allow you to thrive there
are many relationships with other
unhealthy people where concealing your
true intentions and presenting only a
fake persona will allow you to continue
that relationship with minimal distress
there are many situations we can find in
life or that we might happen into in
life where our insecure attachment
strategies are actually incredibly
adaptive and allow us to get what we
want out of that specific situation
however at a certain point you have to
make the decision between whether you
want to keep using the strategy that you
have that is working well for you in
unhealthy environments or if you want to
learn a new strategy that will allow you
to thrive in a different healthier
secure environment and this is not easy
because it requires both changing the
way that you show up in the world but
also changing the places in the world
that you show up so we don't have the
option this is something that i think we
don't talk enough about when it comes to
attachment healing to keep everything as
is but just get healthier and then
everything gets a little bit better as a
result generally with attachment healing
work the problem is that we have built
our entire lives around these systems
that mimic the dysfunction that we know
how to navigate and thrive within so in
order to change our styles we have to
also learn to take ourselves out of a
lot of situations that might currently
be working pretty well for us situations
that might be giving us our livelihood
that might be our only sources of true
human connection and that's why this is
a very slow and very careful process
you don't heal overnight and you also
don't heal without a lot of conscious
thought about exactly how you need to
design your life and shift the pieces of
your life around in order to start
putting yourself in healthier
environments and also responding in
healthy ways to those healthy
environments and before you can do any
of that what you have to figure out is
where your fearful avoidant attachment
strategy is in fact working for you and
probably you're not going to be ready to
throw that entire situation out the
window yet we have to be really aware of
and be able to recognize how we're using
these strategies for good in our own
lives and that really is what it is no
matter how messed up the strategy itself
is when we are using something to allow
ourselves to continue our survival and
to thrive as human beings even if it's
unhealthy it's still better than the
alternative which is getting trampled by
our environment right so what this video
is kind of a call to action to do is not
to change everything overnight not to
abandon everything in your life that's
unhealthy but to just be aware of what
it is that you're going to have to
change which situations you're going to
have to eventually take yourself out of
or learn to create a healthy distance
from in order to begin healing properly
and holistically because we cannot get
healthy if we're unprotected in a sick
environment and that's kind of what it's
like if we try to just be secure inside
of these environments where insecure
responses are actually the most adaptive
so every attachment style has been given
homework this week and your homework is
no different than the anxious or the
avoidant style it is just to become
aware of and start pointing out for
yourself and recognizing where your
fearful avoidance is actually working
really well for you is it working well
for you in your intimate relationship is
it working well for you and your job is
it working well for you and your family
environment that awareness is going to
give you a very very big insight into
why you're doing what you're doing
because it's not random it's not stupid
and it's not senseless our attachment
strategies are intelligent and they have
perfectly adapted us to the environments
that we had to navigate when we were
very young it's only when we grow up and
have more choice that they become
maladaptive so this week it's just about
noticing honoring the ways you have
fought for your own survival and
recognizing which situations you might
have to take yourself out of in the
future in order for the healing process
to really truly take hold in a lasting
way in your life so let me know in the
comments what you're discovering which
situations in your life are being
navigated well by you using a fearful
avoidant attachment strategy and at this
point you're just putting a giant
asterisk beside those things in your own
psyche but those are the situations that
it's going to be most important for you
to return to and continue unpacking as
your attachment healing work continues
all right that's all i have to say for
today on this topic as always i love you
guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i want to
once again encourage you if any part of
this process or any part of this
homework feels overwhelming or
distressing i really encourage you to
unpack all of this with the help of a
professional if that's something that
you have access to if you don't have
access to that i do have a video on what
to do if you can't afford therapy that i
will link in the description of this
video because there are some other
helpful tools that you can source if
that's something that you can't afford
at this time all right as always i love
you guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]