Sign number two that you might have an
avoidant attachment style is that
intimate relationships for you are often
characterized by an ongoing feeling of
pressure. So, for a plethora of reasons
that we will discuss thoroughly in other
videos, people who have avoidant
attachment styles tend to end up in
romantic relationships
disproportionately often with people who
have anxious attachment styles. And
those who have anxious attachment styles
really want a high degree of emotional
intimacy, of closeness. They very
quickly want to plan the future and
might constantly check in to make sure
that their partner is on the same page.
And for someone who has an avoidant
attachment style, this can feel very
stressful because even if you like the
person you're dating, even if you're
really into them, it takes you a long
time to figure out whether or not a
given relationship is something that you
think is a worthwhile investment.
Because you attend so meticulously to
the logistical aspects of your own life,
you have to make sure that a
relationship is something that you can
weave into your life in a way that fits
and makes sense. And when someone is
asking you to make commitments or to
figure out the future before you really
have a firm grasp on whether or not that
person is going to be a good fit for
your life feels very stressful. Now, the
problem is that as an avoidantly
attached person, you don't have a high
degree of emotional self-awareness.