hey guys heidi preeb here this week we
are doing short videos on signs that you
are starting to heal from each of the
attachment styles so i'm going to talk
about three signs today that will show
up pretty early on in the attachment
healing journey that aren't necessarily
going to be the end goal but that
indicate to you you're probably on the
right path in the healing process so
today we are talking about the avoidant
attachment style sign number one and i
think this is the clearest one that
tends to come up for avoidance who begin
the attachment healing journey is that
you are starting to see your somatic and
emotional experiences as valuable data
that it's worth integrating and
considering so many avoidance when they
look at doing the attachment healing
work i have seen kind of a consistent
theme of them being worried that
becoming aware of and prioritizing their
emotional experiences means that they
will be dysregulated all of the time and
that they won't be able to control their
emotions and this is absolutely not the
way it works okay so when you start to
become aware of what's going on for you
in your body and how emotions are
showing up in your body it gives you a
choice about what you want to do about
those emotions when you repress them and
when you shove them into areas of your
consciousness that you never really
visit it does not give you much of an
opportunity to change the way that
you're feeling but when you start to
welcome those feelings into your
conscious awareness consider what they
might be telling you about your life
then you're able to consciously work
with them in a way that actually makes
you more emotionally regulated rather
than less so this is not about following
every whim that you feel it's not about
throwing logic out the window it's about
recognizing that your emotions are
usually bringing things to your
awareness that it might be worth
factoring into your decision making so
it's actually just a process of having
more data than you had before because a
lot of the time when we leave emotional
data out of decision making we're kind
of shooting ourselves in the foot
because we might find ourselves suddenly
really burnt out really exhausted really
unable to continue down the road that we
plan to go down because we didn't
consider the emotional impact it would
have on us to go down that road and this
is where a lot of stress and a lot of
burnout comes from so an early sign that
the healing process is starting to
happen is just that more often than not
you're becoming aware of those emotions
as they arise in your body and you're
able to stop name them take them
seriously as data points and factor them
into the decisions you make without
believing yourself to be completely
irrational and dysregulated for doing so
sign number two that you're starting to
heal from the avoidant attachment style
is that you're starting to see your past
and current vulnerabilities for what
they are so a key part of the avoidant
patterning is actually around
idealization so when you talk to
avoidance about their childhood many of
them will tell you it was perfectly
normal nothing went wrong my parents
were great all the time and they can
struggle to understand that even the
most well-intended parents even the most
well-intended caregivers make mistakes
and that those mistakes can affect their
development in a negative way but part
of that avoidant patterning involves
glossing over things that went wrong and
convincing themselves that unless there
was a real intense tangible consequence
to the things that happened the things
that happened were all benign so another
key part of the avoidant mindset is
really hating anyone who they perceive
to be playing the victim because the
avoidant never lets themselves play the
victim they take radical
self-responsibility to the extreme and
in many cases they're actually
completely unable to recognize the areas
in which they're already vulnerable or
where in the past they should have been
protected but weren't so a key sign that
you're starting to heal from this
attachment style is that you're finally
able to recognize the situations in
which you were vulnerable in your early
life in which you did need care and
protection and support but were not
given it whether that care and support
was practical or emotional in nature and
both matter and this doesn't mean that
you can't look at the past in a balanced
way it doesn't mean that you can't see
why things happen the way that they did
it just means that you can hold two
conflicting things in your mind at once
and recognize both someone may have
wanted things to be different for me
however it still left me vulnerable and
unprotected even though the person who
is trying to protect me had good
intentions and in some cases that was
not the case right and so this part of
the process for some people might
involve recognizing ways in which you
were abused or neglected as a child or
adult but again a really key sign that
you're starting the healing process with
an avoidant attachment style is that
you're starting to be able to recognize
your own victimhood and your own
vulnerability both past and present
regardless of any logical explanations
you may have about why they happen the
way that they did so you're able to
recognize impact regardless of
circumstance sign number three that
you're starting to heal from the
avoidant attachment style is that you're
able to recognize other people's pain as
valid and real even if you don't agree
with the reasoning behind it so part of
having an avoidant attachment style is
the world view i'm okay you're not okay
so the avoidantly attached person had to
learn very early on through the process
of operant conditioning how to
self-regulate so if you are not given
the skills to co-regulate when you are
young you learn to do it yourself albeit
not as well as you would have learned to
do it if you were securely attached so
what that means is that adults using an
avoidant attachment strategy can have a
little bit of an ego around being highly
proficient at keeping their own emotions
in check and they might have a lot of
judgment about others who do not or
cannot do the same now this is
interesting because in order to be
frustrated with other people you have to
be to a certain extent projecting onto
them right otherwise unless someone's
dysregulation truly was inescapable for
you you were trapped in a room with them
and couldn't get out it doesn't make a
lot of sense to be highly frustrated and
activated around someone else choosing
to behave in a way that you would not
choose to behave in the secure response
would be to go oh something different is
going on for that person than what's
going on for me and so probably i don't
understand what they're going through
and i can either learn a little bit more
about it or i can just choose to not
engage with it but with avoidance
spectrum types they often get personally
offended on some level when they see
other people displaying vulnerability
and need in ways that they were never
allowed to display those things and
that's a key sign that you have an
unhealed avoidant attachment style is
feeling consistently triggered by those
who you believe are playing the victim
because again that's a role that you
were never allowed to play and that you
may have compensated for by deciding
that everything was your fault and
taking radical responsibility in the
truest sense of the word radical here in
that no matter what happened you were
able to find a way to justify it as
within your control by putting yourself
at the center of it so now when you see
people who are operating from a strongly
external locus of control it can feel
incredibly frustrating because you have
wired your entire worldview around not
doing that but the longer you go through
the attachment healing process the more
you're able to recognize that
vulnerability pain and victimhood are
all a part of the human experience and
they exist inside of you as well and
when other people are behaving in ways
that we do not allow ourselves to access
inside of ourselves we get triggered or
frustrated when we see them behaving in
that way because we have an internal
rule about how you're not supposed to do
that you're supposed to keep that stuff
inside but the more you're able to
access those more vulnerable parts of
your own psyche the less activating it
is for you to see other people doing the
same you might still think they're over
exaggerating a little bit you might
still think i don't agree with their
reasoning but it's not going to hit you
on that kind of core anger level the way
that it would if you were not aware of
your attachment patterning in that area
so your world view of i'm okay you're
not okay can start to shift a little bit
and you can start to recognize that even
if you don't agree with other people's
pain that doesn't mean their pain is not
real and it doesn't mean their pain is
not valid and actually it has nothing to
do with you at all but just like
everything that you feel is valid and
real everything that other people feel
is valid and real as well it just comes
from a different place so this is the
beginning of that secure world view of
i'm okay you're okay beginning to form
because at the core of that worldview is
the belief that everyone is behaving
rationally given the circumstances that
they've been through so if someone is
dysregulated if someone is displaying
what you would consider to be excessive
vulnerability it probably makes sense
within the worldview and the life
experiences that they have had and
that's what it means to have that i'm
okay you're okay world view it means
that even if someone is quite literally
not okay emotionally you're able to
understand the reason behind it rather
than writing it off as completely
illogical because it's not the way that
you would do it okay that's all i have
to say for today on the early signs that
you are starting to heal from the
avoidant attachment style if you guys
have any questions or comments please
leave them in the comment section below
once again this is a short video so it
is far from comprehensive and we will go
much more into what it takes to start
healing from this attachment style as
well as some later stage signs that the
healing is happening but for now i just
wanted to give you a brief preview of
what it's going to start to look like as
you begin to walk down this path alright
until next time i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourself and each
other and i will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]