So, all of the insecure attachment
styles are prone to having unhealthy
relationships. What's distinct about the
fearful avoidant is that they really do
tend to see themselves at least after a
period of time as the common
denominator, but they might feel
helpless because they so don't
understand their own psychology that
they're just kind of like, well, if I
keep doing bad things, it must be
because I am a bad person. So they have
enough clarity to notice the patterns of
their life and to see themselves as the
common denominator there. But they don't
have enough self-awareness to understand
that there is a reason why this is
happening for them. And it's more to do
with triggers and to do with the way
that their brain neurologically formed
than it is to do with them having bad
intentions.