hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome here if this is
your first time here so on this channel
this week we are doing a series where we
talk about the three insecure attachment
Styles so that's avoidant anxious and
fearful avoidant and what their main
blind spot is when it comes to romantic
relationships or attachment
relationships in general so this video
is going to be a little bit different
than the other two when we talked about
the avoidant and the anxious attachment
Styles we talked about the fact that
each of those two has a blind spot in
the opposite area so avoidant attachment
strategies tend to over rely on
information and cognition to make
decisions about attachment relationships
and they under rely on information about
their own emotional experience which is
often kind of hidden to them by their
own minds and then on the anxious side
of things we have the opposite we have
someone who is over relying on the way
that they feel and under relying on
logic and their ability to make
self-responsible self-protective choices
for themselves so in each of those cases
what we were looking at was how to
develop an awareness of the other side
of the attachment spectrum and integrate
that into the pre-existing strategy that
you already use with fearful avoidant
there is a very different and unique
situation that arises which is that
those with fearful avoidant attachment
Styles have access to all of the
information that both avoidance and
anxiously attached people have about
their own attachment systems so you're
in touch with that part of yourself that
can over rely on logic and cognition and
trying to figure out what makes sense in
an attachment relationship at the
expense of your feelings but then you
can flip to the other side and for a
period of time over rely only on your
emotional experience at the expense of
logic so it's not that you need to
develop an awareness of either side you
have an awareness of both sides it's
that you need to learn how to integrate
those two sides so rather than
functioning one way until you get
triggered into the opposite direction
and then suddenly operating in the
complete opposite way for a period of
time which is very disorienting to both
you and your partner
you need to learn how to operate from a
little bit of both strategies and how to
integrate those two things in order to
have a secure or balanced worldview
because the brilliant thing is that
secure people like you have strong
access to both their emotions their
feeling States they have body awareness
they can use that awareness to inform
them about how they're feeling in
attachment relationships and they have
access to logic to cognition to figuring
out and kind of of critically analyzing
why people might be behaving the way
that they are the difference is that for
secure people they know when to use each
of those strategies so they have a
better understanding and higher degree
of control over when they're choosing to
either logically analyze something or
trust their emotions and follow their
gut impulses on something and in most
cases they're able to strike a balance
between the two so they don't live in a
state of thinking that one side or the
other is bad they don't live in a state
of thinking one side or the other is
shameful they live in a state of going
emotional information is important
information cognitive rational
information is important information
when I'm making decisions about my
attachment relationships I'm going to
check in both with what I feel and with
what I can kind of reason to be a
logical thorough decision and I'm going
to find the happy medium between those
two in order to inform my decisions the
problem with fearful avoidance is that
you have access to all of this
information but you don't have an
ability to use it all at the same time
so let's talk about how this plays out
in romantic relationships and how this
lack of integration can become a blind
spot that keeps you repeating the same
types of relationship mistakes over and
over again so all three insecure
attachment Styles tend to have some
degree of this experience of going into
a relationship and going okay I'm going
to do things differently than last time
right I learned from my last experience
I learned from what I've been through
and in the future I'm going to make sure
that I'm not making the same mistakes
again but often what happens when we do
that is we look at what went right so we
go okay some things went wrong in that
relationship but there was a lot of
things I did really well or maybe there
were a lot of things that were
functioning very well for a period of
time and so next time what I'm going to
make sure I do is double down on what I
know I do well and then maybe try to
find a partner who just doesn't bring
the other side out in me and this is a
particularly problematic strategy for
the fearful avoidant because when you
are fearful avoidant you get triggered
in opposite directions so by default you
have this very activated response that
can come online when you get triggered
into your anxious preoccupied type of
wounding where you can become very
desperate and needy and feeling as
though your body is on fire you need to
get someone's attention you need to get
them to notice you to attend your
feelings or else something terrible is
going to happen right so you have
experience with that activation response
but you also have experience with
deactivation so when you get triggered
in a way that causes you to deactivate
from your attachment system you're
suddenly going to be looking at things
from a very kind of cold detached lens
you might suddenly feel like this switch
has gone off and you have no interest in
a relationship that for a long period of
time you were very interested in and you
can't seem to get your feelings back but
most fearful avoidance spend more time
in one of their responses than the other
so this is often what people are talking
about when they say they lean either
anxious or avoidant if they're fearful
avoidant what I take that to mean is
that if you lean anxious it means that
the majority of the time that you are
consciously aware of your attachment
patterning you are feeling more
preoccupied you are feeling as though
you are gaining a lot of your sense of
self worth and validation out of other
people you might feel as though you are
chronically kind of looking to be
defined through your relationships but
you also have an awareness if you're
fearful avoidant that when the pressure
is on or in certain types of situations
you can deactivate and you can flip into
that more avoidant kind of detached
style of reasoning and if you lean
avoidant as a fearful avoidant it means
that most of the time you consciously
experience yourself as a little bit more
reserved a little bit removed from the
need to have attachment relationships
not particularly valuing of your own or
other people's emotions but sometimes a
flip goes off and you get triggered into
that anxious wounding where suddenly you
become very activated and Hyper aware of
your own emotions and so the degree to
which you live your life in either
strategy is going to differ person to
person so some fearful avoidance
oscillate quite a bit between these two
strategies others might find they spend
like 75 % of their time in kind of a
lowlevel state of deactivation and then
25% of their time in hyperactivation or
vice versa but what's going to happen is
that you are going to begin like any
human being does to Define yourself
based on the way that you most
consistently perceive yourself to be
experiencing yourself so what I mean by
that is that if you are a fearful
avoidant who leans more avoidant you're
likely to Define yourself in terms of
being someone who's maybe more rational
more analytical maybe an intellectual
and you might develop this kind of
embarrassment around the fact that you
know there's also this other side to you
that can be quite impulsive emotional
whatever it is and on the flip side if
you define yourself as someone who is
more often in their anxious patterning
you're likely to have an identity that
fixates more on you being a kind of very
good very selfless very innocent and
giving person and you might be kind of
embarrassed about the fact that you know
you're not always the most caring or the
most compassionate or the most committed
when you get into romantic relationships
so most fearful avoidance I find develop
a social mask that they use most of the
time when they're navigating their
day-to-day life that reflects one part
of their strategy and neglects the other
to a fairly significant degree and I
think that whichever one you pick tends
to be a reflection of what worked best
for you when you were younger so if most
of the time in your early life it worked
for you to be a little bit more detached
a little bit more analytical a little
bit more removed from your emotional
experience you're probably still most
comfortable spending most of your time
in that type of response and the same is
true in the opposite direction if what
worked for you as a child was showing
other people how innocent and vulnerable
you were you're probably going to still
feel as though that's where you're
comfortable spending more of your time
and then we get into attachment
relationships and the pressure switch
turns on right when you get into a
romantic relationship whatever is in
your attachment system will eventually
arise that's just how it works so if you
are fearful avoidant but you lean more
towards avoidance you will at some point
in a romantic relationship get triggered
into that preoccupied anxious energy and
the same is true in the opposite
direction if you lean more anxious you
will at some point if you're fearful
avoidant get triggered in your
attachment relationships into that
deactivating cold kind of calculating
worldview you and so what I hear a lot
of fearful avoidance saying when they
get out of a bad relationship is I lost
myself in that relationship because you
have this idea of yourself that is kind
of one way or the other and then you see
this opposite part of yourself come out
in the relationship and you go well
what's the common denominator here it's
this other person I'm not usually like
this in other scenarios I don't usually
get all worked up like this or I don't
usually get this kind of cold and
detached like this so it must be that
this other person brought that out in me
and if I can just go into a different
relationship with someone who doesn't
bring that out in me I can continue to
be the person that I know myself to be
when I'm out of relationship which is
that strategy that you prefer to depend
upon the error that is getting made here
and this is the error that will keep you
stuck in a pattern of repeating the same
types of relationships over and over and
over again until you solve this is that
you you did not lose yourself in a
relationship if you are a fearful
avoidant who had the other side of your
attachment system triggered by a partner
you found a part of yourself in that
relationship that you are normally very
skilled at repressing and not letting
other people see now what this does not
mean is that that part of yourself is
this terrible shameful secret that you
have to keep hidden at all costs I think
that is what a lot of fearful avoidance
kind of
intuitively instinctively feel in their
bodies to be true is that the part of
their attachment system that they're not
as comfortable with is this kind of
monster that lives inside of them that
they're hiding from the world and they
have to find a way to hide it better and
better and better and they have to go
into new relationships with better
hiding strategies but the solution to
this problem unfortunately is to do the
exact opposite our attachment patterning
our attachment responses particularly
the ones that come online when the
pressure gets really high are not going
to go anywhere magically and we can only
hide them for so long if they're in
there at some point when the pressure is
high they're going to come out I want to
reiterate I often see fearful avoidant
people going into relationships and
being like this time I'm going to hold
it together I'm going to make sure that
I'm playing to my strengths and what
ends up happening is that instead of
their partner seeing their kind of other
side if you will early on in the
relationship ship it happens later on
because they've learned to effectively
suppress it for longer but then what
happens is that it's extra disregulated
for their partner when this sudden very
opposite side to how their partner
usually behaves comes out so now it's
probably even more upsetting and causing
even more chaos in the relationship than
it would have if their partner had just
seen that side of them earlier on and so
this can actually become a kind of
escalating cycle of increasingly more
chaotic relationships because you are
trying harder and harder to suppress
something that actually needs to be
integrated so what does that mean if you
have a facet of your attachment system
that you frequently neglect it's kind of
like the pressure in that area is just
getting stronger and stronger and then
finally when the lid comes off you're
going to feel all of it at once whether
that's this extreme preoccupation
activation anger whatever it is or
whether it's this extreme form of
disgust towards other people this EX ex
reme form of judgment and
self-righteousness whatever it is you
are suppressing is going to come out in
order to stop the cycle of this coming
out at extremely inopportune moments
like when you and your partner are going
through your first serious conflict or
your first serious life transition
that's putting you under a lot of stress
you need to learn to open that box a
little bit and keep it open constantly
now this is going to require you to put
down a very significant part of your ego
because if you are someone who defines
yourself as a little bit more avoidant a
little bit more logical analytical you
might pride yourself on how many strong
emotions you do not feel you are going
to have to accept that actually there is
a part of you that is quite emotional
that is quite reactive that can be quite
needy and that really does crave close
connected relationships and you're going
to have to find a way to work that part
of yourself into your overall identity
so when new people meet you when new
romantic interests meet you they don't
see you as this kind of very detached
analytical person who completely has
their together all of the time
they're going to see the full you which
includes that analytical intellectual
side of yourself but it also includes
the side of yourself that is vulnerable
and that knows that they need
relationships in order to feel fulfilled
and happy and who can be open to
learning through relationships and if
you lean more avoidant that's probably a
really scary thought and on the flip
side of this if you are someone who
likes to think of yourself as kind of
chronically innocent and always doing
things for the good of other people and
never doing anything strategically or
never making decisions that upsets other
people it's going to be difficult for
you to accept that actually there is a
significant part of you that is quite
self-interested that can flip into this
mode where all of a sudden you are not
concerned at all with your partner's
experience and you are just focused on
your own and again this is not an
altogether negative thing secure people
know when it's time to co-regulate and
when it's time to take a step back and
tend to their own needs with compassion
and boundary is the difference right so
what often you'll see with fearful
avoidance is that there's this fear that
if they are to integrate what they
normally try to repress they're going to
become the unhealthy version of that
thing so if you lean avoidant and you
start integrating the emotional parts of
your experience that does not mean
you're going to become an emotional mess
if anything if you are doing it well
with help and we're going to talk about
what that looks like you're going to be
able to understand when is it the
appropriate time for me to be making
decisions based on my emotions versus
when is it the appropriate time for me
to be thinking about what makes sense
and making decisions based on logic and
when you learn discernment and you learn
learn how to look at both sides of
things and decide which one it makes
sense to prioritize a little bit more
heavily right now it makes a world of
difference because what happens when you
have this information disintegrated is
that you're not deciding right you're
going along making decisions based on
either emotion or logic most of the time
and then in moments when you don't
expect it the other side comes online
screaming and suddenly you want to do
everything completely differently than
you've wanted to do things for let's say
the past two months or if you're someone
who gets triggered in different
directions quite often this could be a
day-to-day thing and that makes it
really hard to make long-term plans to
make decisions about important
relationships to even know how you feel
about a relationship or where you want
it to go because you're never looking at
both sides at once so what does it look
like to do that to do that I recommend
making a practice that is intentional
and deliberate for a long period of time
around integrating the part of yourself
that you are less comfortable with so
for myself this meant accepting that I
am someone who is not always purely calm
regulated and rational there are times
when I get triggered and I can become
hyperactivated I can become hyper angry
I can feel desperate for my partner to
see my point of view or else I feel in
my body that I will not be okay and by
the way this is something that everybody
who is insecurely attached feels at some
point or another especially when you
start working with your attachment
system because we have kept these things
kind of cooped up inside of us for so
long they come out as very extreme
responses when they come out when in
reality what we want to do is diffuse
that response so that we're feeling a
little bit of it at the appropriate
moments all the time so instead of
repressing all of our feelings and then
exploding we want to be staying in touch
with what we're feeling on a consistent
basis and bringing up our emotional
experience when it's appropriate not
when we've been resisting it for so long
that it can only come out like a volcano
erupting right so if you lean more
avoidant as a fearful avoidant I
recommend you make a practice daily if
possible of sensitizing yourself to your
emotional experience so that can look
like doing meditative exercises that
drop the focus out of your head where
you're most comfortable and into your
body and actually learning what it feels
like to respond to your life not just
from your thoughts but from your felt
lived experience and then finding safe
spaces where you can share that
experience so if you've been around this
channel for a while you've probably
heard me plug 12-step programs which you
can absolutely be an atheist to attend
and to work the steps I am not a
follower of any religious group and I
have been benefiting hugely from working
the steps in these programs but what
going to meetings in groups like let's
say codependent Anonymous adult children
of alcoholic and dysfunctional families
Anonymous will help you do is give you a
space to share your emotional
experiences in a safe environment that
is designed to be non-triggering so it
can be really hard to go from always
repressing your feelings to suddenly
sharing them with everyone right that is
a huge huge leap to make so what I
recommend you do whether this is through
therapy through support groups through a
friend who you've made a mutual
commitment to trying to become more
emotionally honest with is make some
sort of practice out of getting in touch
with your emotional experience and
sharing it in contained environments a
little bit every single day now if you
are on the other side of the spectrum if
you air more anxious and then you find
that you have deactivation responses
that come online in attachment
relationships you're going to need to
start working with that deactivation
responses can be a little bit trickier
to work with because they are more
subtle they pull you out of your body
and into your head which is the opposite
of an anxious response which tends to
pull you out of your head head into your
body but then when you get deactivated
it's like all of a sudden all of the
emotions you've been feeling are kind of
absent from your awareness and all you
can see is all of the problems all of
the faults in your partner all of the
reasons why X Y or Z won't work and in
order to make that a more integrated
experience for yourself what you're
going to need to do is find a way to
make a practice out of analyzing your
relationships from a more objective
standpoint so whether that is going into
therapy whether that is also doing group
work or group programs whether that is
journaling day to-day your work is going
to be about learning to take yourself
out of the Romantic fantasy that you
often get stuck in and learn to see your
relationship more consistently and
evenly for what it is so this might mean
welcoming back feedback on your
relationship from friends who you know
are a little bit more objective than you
it might mean making sure you're keeping
a running list of what you're looking
for in a partnership on a practical
level and whether or not your
relationship is matching up with that it
also is likely to mean being very firm
with yourself about making sure that you
are keeping up with your life and your
commitments outside of the relationship
if you tend to get very in meshed and go
full on into the relationship and then
down the line get deactivated and go
whoa whoa whoa I've lost myself all the
things I used to love I'm no longer
doing I need to get out of this
relationship immediately in order to get
myself back your work might be in being
very strict with yourself in making sure
that when you get into a relationship
you are not changing your life in highly
significant ways that you are going to
begin to resent down the line so this
might look like picking certain
activities certain commitments that are
just yours and holding yourself
responsible for maintaining those
activities and maintaining that
independent life outside of your
relationship even in the times where you
want to go full into the relationship No
Holds Barred and the idea is that at the
end of this process you want to arrive
at a place where you are no longer
centering your identity around a portion
of who you are where instead of seeing
yourself as a person who is mostly one
way but then there's this crazy side of
you that comes out in relationships
you're seeing yourself as a person who
behaves consistently inside and outside
of relationships which is how secure
people are right of course there are
ways we act with our partners that we
wouldn't act with our friends in terms
of physical affection and the degree of
emotional intimacy or the plans we make
about the future but when it comes to
your actual personality like who you are
as a person how someone else would
describe you the description your
partner gives or would be able to give
secretly should be pretty consistent
with how your friends or family members
or colleagues would describe you there
should not be this massive discrepancy
between how you behave in attachment
relationships and how you behave
day-to-day and so you will know that you
are ready to go back back into an
attachment relationship and have it be
highly likely that it will turn out
differently from the way things have
turned out in the past when you have
integrated that other side of you so for
myself because I've traditionally leaned
more avoidant on the fearful avoidant
side of things I made a deal with myself
when I got out of my last serious
partnership that I'm not allowed to go
back into another long-term romantic
relationship until I have at least five
friends who I have true emotional
intimacy with because the big problem I
had was I would not be emotionally
intimate on a true deep level with
anyone other than my partner which then
made becoming codependent on my partner
very easy because I didn't have those
support systems outside of the
relationship I had to be attending
meetings and going to therapy and having
people who knew the side of me that
normally only comes out in Partnerships
when I'm under extreme stress if you
lean anxious the work might be letting
people see you as not purely vulnerable
and innocent it might be learning to be
honest with other people about the
mistakes that you're making about the
ways in which you're behaving selfishly
through trying to get your needs met
through other people and the ways in
which you tend to neglect yourself in
favor of a relationship you need to be
able to build a life where people see
that side of you and where you learn
that it's actually healthy to operate
from both sides secure people have their
own worlds and their own lives and they
know when it's time to be a little bit
selfish and self-protective and because
they don't see that as a negative thing
they have a much easier time resolving
conflicts because they can just take
accountability for when they're doing
that instead of needing to make it seem
like they're always innocent and
vulnerable and never in the wrong and
secure people also have an awareness of
their emotional experience they don't
think it's shameful or wrong or a flaw
to have feelings and so they can
comfortably Express them on a consistent
basis they don't kind of hold them in
until they all explode at once and so
the cool part of all of this is that the
more you integrate this part of yourself
that at this point you might think is so
shameful and needs to get hidden at all
costs the more secure you become the
healthier a person you become and the
easier it actually becomes to connect
with people across the board the problem
is not that you are not hiding this part
of yourself well enough it's that you're
not exposing it to air enough right
things need oxygen to function properly
and when we keep these parts of
ourselves compartmentalized sh away when
we don't ever let them see the light of
day they grow kind of weird and messed
up inside of us and then when they come
out they come out in weird messed up
ways but if we were just learning to
crack open the lid on these parts of
ourselves that we normally repress let
other people see them people we trust
therapists people in support groups
friends and family who we have really
close trusting relationships with if we
have the luxury of having those types of
relationships the more we expose those
stowed away parts of ourselves to oxygen
the more they learn to breathe and grow
into healthier expressions of themselves
and when we have those healthy
expressions of either our emotion or our
logical thought process up and running
it becomes way easier to show them to
other people because they're not all
like weird and disheveled from getting
kept in the basement for so long they
just are what they are so the end goal
I've said it before and I'll say it
again of healing from fearful avoidant
attachment is learning to be the same
person everywhere you go and that might
feel impossible right now if you are
very much in a state of repressing one
side or the other and just know it is a
slow long process I would love for there
to be a hack but there's not a hack all
I can promise you is that at the end of
the day if you're able to go through
this process and very slowly learn how
to let those parts of yourself that you
usually keep hidden see the light of day
as well as which situations it's safe
for you to do that in you are going to
develop this incredible sense of
discernment that is going to allow you
to choose healthy relationships that you
can show up as a whole person to
probably for the first time in your life
and I can tell you for sure that is
worth all of the work no ego trip is
ever going to feel as grounded and calm
and good in a true sense of the word as
knowing that you are going into every
new relationship not having to hide
anything because you don't think that
anything about yourself is inherently
broken and shameful anymore and that's a
feeling I will always always encourage
people to do the work to fight for
because there is not anything broken or
wrong or inherently flawed with any of
us we just Stow certain things away
because we get ashamed of them and they
get all weird inside of us and we just
have to learn how to take them out and
nurture them back to life in a healthy
way and that's what this process is all
about all right that's all I have to say
for today on fearful avoidance and the
integration process that is going to
allow you to stop getting into the same
types of relationship drama over and
over again as always let me know in the
comments what you guys are thinking
what's coming up for you as you're
watching this and also as always I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your inner
children and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]