if you have a fearful avoidant
attachment style the problem is that you
might be biased towards believing that
acquiring a super deep understanding of
yourself and other people is enough for
being able to navigate Intimate
Relationships effectively and it would
be so nice if it worked that way but
unfortunately it doesn't because the
moment your attachment system is
triggered and your fight or flight or
freezer Fawn responses come online your
body does not care how many psychology
textbooks you've read it is going to
react from a place of pure Instinct so
these skills for healthy relating have
to be built in the trenches in the
moments where you get activated or
deactivated and you're able to take a
beat choose a different response and
allow your body to log one more memory
of a time when you are able to navigate
a high-stakes situation with Grace and
with self-forgiveness and that is where
your true route to Healing Begins