hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel
we're going to be talking about the
fearful avoidant attachment Styles
relationship to intimacy so I made a
video a while back that talked about why
fearful avoidance often find it so
difficult to move on after a romantic
relationship has ended and one of the
key things that we talked about in that
video is the fact that if you are fear
avoidant you tend to find it extremely
challenging to allow yourself to be
really deeply seen and known by another
person and the reason this is so
challenging for the fearful avoidant is
because they have the same shame bind
around a lot of their core emotions that
those who air more dismissive avoidant
tend to have but because they also have
access to their anxious wounding they're
aware of their inter internal experience
as being highly emotional as opposed to
the dismissive avoidant who has more
fully repressed those deep emotional
wounds and so the fearful avoidant can
walk around feeling absolutely paralyzed
and like they are completely unable to
express their negative emotions in the
majority of their interactions so
including things like social
interactions professional interactions
they might be very warm and engaging on
the surface but all of the deeply
shameful stuff they keep hidden down
deep and so the only place that stuff
ends up coming out is in Intimate
Relationships because if you go deep
enough with another person so
particularly in romantic relationships
though this could happen in a friendship
or a family relationship all of that
stuff that they don't want to come out
because they feel as though it is wrong
and bad ends up coming out and so they
end up having a type of intimacy that is
exclusive only only to the relationships
where they weren't able to fully keep
their self-control online because the
fearful avoidant is generally trying to
avoid all of that stuff coming out by
carefully monitoring which sides of
themselves they let other people see so
they might want to be thought of is
incredibly cerebral and very
intellectual and as though they
understand emotions but are above the
authentic raw experiencing of them and
then when they get close to someone and
they get triggered that stuff tends to
come out someone else sees all of what
the fearful avoidant is deeply ashamed
of which is by the way just human
emotions that have become shame bound
and then they likely feel a sense of
intimacy with that person that they do
not feel with anybody else now all of us
even secure people feel most intimate
with others when they know us the most
deeply it is a human need to have the
full range of our emotional Spectrum be
seen empathized with and to a reasonable
degree understood by other people so
when the fearful avoidant achieves this
inside of a relationship Often by
mistake as a result of the emotions that
they try to keep pushed down getting
activated from a trigger they experience
intimacy which is a human need that is
very important the problem is that if
the fearful avoidant leaves that
relationship because often relationships
are a place where they get frequently
triggered and experience a lot of
dysfunction there is a high likelihood
that there's now nowhere else they can
go for intimacy now today we're going to
be talking about why it is so vital for
fearful avoidants who are in the healing
process to start developing intimacy
outside of their immediate relationship
so if you have this attachment style it
means there is a significantly higher
than average chance that it developed as
a product of early abuse or at the least
of being frightened of your caregiver so
in a healthy Dynamic caregivers provide
protection and comfort for their
children if your caregiver is the person
that you need comfort and protection
from because they are being abusive or
otherwise scary and threatening to you
when you are young you now are in this
Dynamic where the only person you have
intimacy with the only person who sees
your fear your distress your upset your
anger is is the person who is causing it
and so it's in your best interests to
try to appease the caregiver to find a
way to return them to regulation so that
they can then soothe you from the pain
that they have caused and so this can
lead to fearful avoidance getting into
Intimate Relationships getting hurt or
wounded within that relationship and not
having anywhere else to go because the
brain automatically hyper fixates on
getting their partner to change State
and become regular ated and grounded
enough to give them the soothing that
they need this can lead to some deeply
codependent Dynamics particularly if the
fearful avoidant is in a partnership
with someone who is emotionally
unhealthy in some significant way even
in the healthiest of relationships when
a rupture has happened so when two
people have had a disagreement or an
argument it's very normal for each
person to take a little bit of space go
co-regulate with their other Intimates
so their family members their friends
their community members and then come
back to the relationship in a place
where they are much more resourced to
sort the issue out with each other if
you are a fearful avoidant it's highly
likely you think that inside of a
partnership your options are bail when
things get tough and deactivate and go
away from the relationship or stay in
the relationship with an obsessive focus
on trying to re-regulate your partner
and get them to a place where they are
able to comfort your wounds again this
is part of a healthy repair process in
Secure Dynamics but it cannot be the
only option that you have if your
partner is not ready to go there right
away if the relationship needs some time
and space to breathe you are going to
need to have other intimate connections
you can go to in order to avoid becoming
codependent so what we're going to do is
we're going to start unpacking why
fearful avoidance tend to fall into this
position of being in what I call an
intimacy desert or having scarcity in
their ideas around intimacy and we're
going to talk about how we can start
reversing that process so that if you
have that one close connection whether
it's a partner or a friend or a family
member or a mentor whatever it is it
does not feel like you are walking
through a desert and they are the only
Oasis for Miles again that's a recipe
for codependency and dysfunction so when
I was the deepest inside of my own fear
ful avoidant pattern it I distinctly
remember feeling like the intimate
connection that I had at the time was
like this warm house I lived inside up
and the rest of the world was frigidly
cold and sometimes the heat in that
house would go off sometimes I would
have a fight with the person I was in
that intimate connection with and the
problem is that if you really think
about this situation if you have a house
that has heat 50% of the time or even
20% of the time or 10 % of the time and
then you have an outside world where
there is heating 0% of the time it is
going to serve your interests to stay
inside of that house and become fixated
with trying to get the heat to turn back
on rather than going outside of the
house because outside there's no chance
of getting your intimacy needs met but
inside a relationship however
intermittent and however dysfunctional
it is there is a higher than zero chance
and you're un conscious knows this so
you're likely going to stay exactly
where you are and keep fixating on
trying to get the heat back onone inside
of your relationship so that you can
feel warm again and to track this
metaphor with real life what we're of
course talking about here is when you
are in need of intimacy because all
humans when they get disregulated are in
need of intimacy if the only place you
know how to get your intimacy needs met
are within a given partnership because
you might not have self self intimacy
you are going to become fixated on
getting that co-regulation from your
partner who if they are in a fight with
you might not be resourced enough to
give that to you your other option of
course is to deactivate which is
essentially to walk out into the cold
world and find ways to temporarily not
feel the cold which is to say get away
from the relationship and what it's
bringing up from you but at the expense
of your emotional needs getting seen and
met which is a human need and so the
solution to this problem is not to
minimize the fighting inside your
partnership though that might help it's
not to get better at avoiding your
emotions because that is not a long-term
strategy the solution is to learn to
warm the outside world up so the first
problem we're going to look at here is
the fact that you find it so challenging
to develop intimate Connections in a
casual way which is to say in a way that
you choose rather than a way that
happens accidentally by all of your
trauma coming up in the middle of an
argument or some other high pressure
situation if you have a fearful avoidant
attachment Style I want to give credit
to the fact that warming up the outside
world is a Herculean task it requires
you going against all of that patterning
that teaches you that there is something
wrong disgusting and bad about you and
that if anyone really got to know you
and really saw the full range of what
you feel inside and what you think and
who you are as a person you would be a
abandoned forever that is all of the
stuff that other people need to see in
you in order to develop intimacy with
you and so what I recommend if you are
really stuck here and you feel like
there is absolutely no way you would
ever be able to show yourself fully to
someone like a friend or a new person
who you would meet I recommend starting
with a therapist or a coach so someone
who is trained to sit with people
sharing their deepest darkest
experiences and can meet them with
compassion when I started doing this
work for about the first year the only
person I had an intimate connection with
was my partner at the time and then I
added in a therapist and I learned to
share myself in an honest and
emotionally intimate way in that Dynamic
and then after about a year of
practicing that I developed one really
deep emotionally intimate friendship
outside of the intimate relationship
that I was still in at that time and
then over for the next couple of years I
eventually learned to generalize those
skills of connecting in a deep authentic
way to new friends and new community
members until I had a circle of people I
could go to who I felt truly knew me
both the good parts of me and the bad
parts but what had to happen first was I
had to work with my therapist and with
myself and through the help of a lot of
support groups and a lot of workshops to
stop thinking that my emotional
experience was inherently shameful and
wrong and if that anybody learned how
many feelings I had they would be
disgusted by me that was a long and
frankly still ongoing process but it's
the only hope we have as fearful
avoidance for eventually reaching a
place where we have enough intimate
connections to sustain us should our
primary connection experience trouble if
you are fearful avoidant you likely go
into most scenarios wearing your
avoidant mask so you might be super warm
super friendly super engaged but you're
likely still going into most social
environments feeling as though you have
to keep all those really deep parts of
yourself hidden
completely this is of course different
than someone with a more secure style
who of course does not immediately
disclose all of their deepest darkest
most shameful Parts but they will
eventually as they get to know people
disclose more and more of those parts
until they have a variety of intimate
connections as opposed to the fearful
avoidant who likely has the secret goal
of keeping the parts of themselves that
they're ashamed of hidden absolutely
forever to die with those parts of
themselves unseen and then again that's
all the stuff that comes up when you're
triggered and accidentally ends up
developing intimacy with other people
and this is once again not something you
are consciously choosing okay if if you
have a shame bound Emotional Self it is
hardwired into you to freeze and
suppress any time you think that
somebody's going to see that part of you
so to start counteracting this problem
there is a kind of trick of the fearful
avoidant patterning that I implore you
to use to help you get better at this
skill fearful avoidance tend to feel
most comfortable and like they're able
to drop their guards in situations where
other people are vulnerable before they
are so if you can find yourself
environments where vulnerability is the
norm so things like going to support
groups where there are explicit rules
around vulnerable sharing and how that
will be contained or finding workshops
or clubs that attract the kind of people
who are ready to be very emotionally
honest and vulnerable You're going to
have a much higher than average chance
of eventually learning to drop that math
askk and become authentic with people in
that environment so surrounding yourself
with highly emotionally intelligent
people is going to be a really good move
here and this might be counter to your
normal patterning you might actually
find it kind of threatening to be around
really emotionally intelligent people
because you might have this idea they're
going to discover what's wrong with me
they're going to get in my head they're
going to see all the garbage and they're
going to find out that I'm a terrible
person when in reality these are the
types of people if they have good
functioning compassion that are actually
going to facilitate your healing Journey
the most so some things we need to work
on inside before we change what we're
doing in the outside world and in this
case I'm suggesting you do the exact
opposite you change your environment to
include as many open vulnerable
emotionally supportive environments as
possible you don't expect yourself to go
in and immediately be able to be as open
and vulnerable as everybody else so you
pay respect to your own defenses which
will be online at first and over time
all you need to do is watch and observe
other people's acceptance of vulnerable
emotions and eventually start very
slowly disclosing more of your own even
though it might feel very challenging
borderline excruciating to start doing
that a little bit at a time you can
start to learn the skill of intentional
intimacy rather than accidental intimacy
and I do have two videos that I think
are going to be really important for you
to check out if this process feels very
intimidating one is on self- intimacy so
being willing to look at the parts of
ourselves that we're really afraid of
and the second is on interpersonal
intimacy so how to Wade slowly into that
process and I'll link both of those in
the description of this
video and this all leads us to the last
point which is that the more exposure we
get to intimacy inside of different
relationships the more we start to
intuitively understand that one type of
intimacy is simply not enough so this
original accidental strategy of only
having intimacy with our partner or with
one friend or whoever it is at a time
was always doomed to fail because we
need different types of intimacy
that we can only get from different
types of relationships so we need things
like friendship intimacy where we can
just totally and fully relax and know
that there's a lot of space for us to be
our more imperfect selves we also might
really need romantic intimacy which
might include things like sexual
intimacy or planning a life alongside
somebody else that's its own form of
intimacy we might also need things like
mentorship intimacy so having dynamics
that are more one directional where
we're going to someone to learn and to
receive care and support that isn't
necessarily reciprocated so the type of
intimacy that comes from being seen by
someone who serves as an enlightened
witness for us and then there are other
forms of intimacy that might be more
akin to family relationships where
people witness your change and growth
over a long period of time and so the
idea here here is that if you're looking
for one person to meet all of those
intimacy needs it is absolutely going to
fail as a strategy because some of those
intimacy types are mutually exclusive
there's types of intimacy you can have
with a friend that you just cannot have
with a partner and vice versa because
there are certain bounds around
different types of relating but if
you're expecting a partner to be able to
fulfill all of those needs for you and
especially if you expect them to just
intuitively know which of those types of
intimacy needs you need from them at a
given point in time going to be really
really messy you cannot be all things to
all people and neither can anybody else
the only way you will break this habit
of codependent relationships as a
fearful avoidant is when you learn that
you can get comfort and protection from
people other than the person who hurt
you when you can do this
your relationships have a lot more
breathing space you suddenly retain the
option to leave bad relationships and
stay out of them and you also resource
yourself immensely whether you are in a
relationship or not because now you have
a lot more outlets for being deeply
supported as well as giving support to
others and being part of meaningful
communities where you're bringing your
whole entire self to the table not just
that version of yourself that seems
invulnerable okay I think that's all I'm
going to say on this topic for today as
always let me know in the comments what
you're thinking feeling any questions
that come up as you're going through
this video I love you guys I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really
[Music]
soon