hey guys heidi preeb here today i wanted
to talk about something that i've been
thinking a lot about over the past
couple of weeks
and that is the fearful avoidant
attachment style in their relationship
with anger so for those of you who don't
know i like to think of myself as much
more centered in secure attachment these
days i've been working extensively over
the past couple of years on healing my
own attachment style but the attachment
style that i started out with and lived
most of my life with is the fearful
avoidant attachment style and one of the
things that i believed for most of my
life very strongly this was actually
kind of the predominant narrative that i
had about myself in my own head is that
i was a person who had extreme anger
issues so from the time i was very young
like i was diagnosed with oppositional
defiance disorder as a very young child
there was this thread that kind of
followed me throughout my entire
childhood my teenagehood my early adult
life that i was someone who didn't know
how to control or deal with anger and i
always thought my entire life that the
solution to the problem of me having
anger issues was learning to be less
angry and learning to express anger less
so i developed kind of myriad strategies
to help me deal with these anger issues
i went to an anger management therapist
who was actually the first person to
teach me about attachment and how our
relationship with anger particularly
with intimate partners is very tied into
attachment i got really into like
meditation and mindfulness and all of
these techniques that i thought would
help me feel less angry and what i am
only realizing at this point in my life
the problem for all of those years was
never that i was expressing anger in
situations where i shouldn't have been
expressing anger the problem is that
because i had this narrative that anger
was so bad and i should never feel it i
should never express anger so anytime my
anger felt like it was a one two three
four five six seven even eight out of
ten i would not express it and then all
of that stuff would build up i would
become so resentful so angry so
intolerable of those feelings of
resentment and anger inside my own body
that i would explode and by the time i
exploded it would always be a 9 or 10
out of 10 on the anger scale and so i
wasn't getting the results that i wanted
out of the times that i was angry
because by the time you get to a 9 or a
10 it's pretty hard to self-regulate
while you're angry so what i would do is
explode usually at my partners and then
i would need my partner's help
self-regulating me back to a more common
relaxed state and often i would realize
in those explosive episodes oh i
really need my partner's help here but
my partner is the person i'm angry at so
now i'm kind of switching between a
fight response and a fun response
because i want to get my anger out but i
also know that i need to get my partner
on my side or whoever i'm angry at on my
side to help me calm back down because i
don't have good strategies for calming
my anger down on my own and i want to
point out here that whether or not you
do have good down regulation skills for
when you get really angry will depend
largely upon your upbringing so when we
are very young our caregivers have to
teach us how to calm down our nervous
systems from anger and how to return to
a baseline and if we learn that skill we
grow up knowing how to do it for
ourselves but i think that many fearful
avoidance i would almost argue the
majority if not all of them have not had
healthy experiences from their
caregivers learning to down regulate
from anger i think that very often those
who develop a fearful avoidant
attachment style grew up in the family
scapegoat role which i have a whole
video on that i will link in the
description of this video but what
happens when you're scapegoated in your
family is that you are chronically told
that your anger is invalid that you are
overreacting that when you point out the
family dysfunction and when you break
that rule that is inherent to
dysfunctional family systems which is
don't talk about it you get called crazy
or irrational or overly angry and your
normal healthy human anger response
which is absolutely the appropriate
response to injustice is pathologized in
you so you learn anytime i feel angry i
must be behaving irrationally and when
you grow up with that belief it becomes
very easy to internalize it and to
dismiss all of those things that you
feel very slightly low-grade angry about
until you absolutely can't take it
anymore and then you will have those
explosions right so what is blowing my
mind at this point in my life is
realizing that all of those years when i
felt so sure that i was struggling with
anger issues what was actually happening
was that i was refusing to respond in
all of the situations where it was
actually extremely appropriate for me to
feel low level anger where i truly was
picking up on injustices either in my
relationships with people or in the
world in general that it made perfect
sense for me to be angry about but
because i'd gotten in this habit of kind
of gaslighting myself and telling myself
any anger i feel is irrational and
invalid i never expressed any of those
one two three four five six sevens or
sometimes even eights out of ten on the
anger scale and so things that i could
have resolved at the time if i had
expressed anger at the time grew into
much bigger problems and i think that
this is such a struggle for the fearful
avoidance specifically because we do
have that avoidance mechanism as our
baseline for our attachment system so
those on the avoidant side of the
attachment spectrum tend to repress
anger pretty much to the extent that
they can get away with it now this
doesn't mean they don't feel anger it
does not mean that anger is not present
in their bodies but it means that for
the most part those on the avoidance
spectrum do not experience a lot of
conscious anger or if they do they might
kind of brush it off as well i'm just
feeling annoyed i'm just feeling
frustrated i'm just having a bad day i
just need to get a better sleep tonight
or whatever it is or they might feel
annoyed or frustrated at other people
refusing to take responsibility for what
they believe it is their responsibility
to take on but even then they tend to
bring it back to well it's just my
responsibility to not engage with things
that make me angry so there is this kind
of disconnect between the feelings of
anger that live in the body of anyone
who has an avoidant attachment style and
the conscious experience of anger which
is minimal now here's where it gets
tricky for the fearful avoidant because
the anxious attachment spectrum
experiences anger quite viscerally and
quite consciously the fearful avoidant
will often go from living in avoidance
mode where a lot of the feelings that
they have are not crossing the threshold
into their conscious awareness and then
something will trigger them into an
anxious attachment response and suddenly
it's like all of that anger that's been
in their body that they've been feeling
for a long time that's been building up
is right in the forefront of their
conscious awareness and now all of a
sudden over something that might be a
one or two out of ten for someone else
they are experiencing a level 9 or 10
anger response so there is this giant
blow up that happens and then afterwards
they feel intensely guilty and go right
back into telling themselves every time
i feel anger it's irrational now the
solution here is actually not to be less
angry the solution is to learn to be
more angry on a lower scale at the
appropriate times okay but i think like
every fearful avoidant out there thinks
that what they need to do is learn to
get their anger under wraps no you
actually need to sensitize yourself to
your anger while it's happening don't
listen to that voice in your head that
tells you i don't have a right to be
angry about this if you are feeling
angry you have a right to be angry now
that does not mean that you can express
it in an abusive or deliberately harmful
way but it does mean that you have the
right to feel that feeling in your body
okay
and in order to get that feeling out of
your body it can help to express it
outwardly and again because you only
have the skills for dealing with like
explosive anger you might think there is
no healthy way to express anger but
there absolutely is and i am going to
make future videos on this because i
think that it absolutely warrants a lot
of its own explanation but i think that
you'll find that anger is a
self-correcting force so if you express
a boundary to someone the first time
something you're uncomfortable with
happens they're a lot less likely to do
it the second time and definitely if you
express that same boundary again the
second time and you express that you're
angry about them crossing it they're now
a lot less likely to do it the third
time but if every single time your
boundary gets crossed you tell yourself
oh it doesn't make sense for me to be
angry about that so i'm just going to
ignore it and hope it goes away by the
10th time they cross your boundary now
you're very angry and also they have a
long list of times that you didn't speak
up so now you feel less justified in
your anger because you are the one who
didn't set the boundary but if from the
beginning you had recognized i am like a
2 or 3 out of 10 on the anger scale and
it's going to be helpful in the long run
for me to speak up about it you could
have stopped an entire sequence of
events from happening that eventually
led to that 10 out of 10 response right
so this is exactly what i like to remind
myself of when i still frequently have
the thought to myself this doesn't make
sense to express it's not a big enough
problem for me to bring it up and talk
to someone about it i remind myself the
fact that it feels small is the reason
why you should bring it up the fact that
it's currently a 2 out of 10 on the
anger scale means it's actually in the
optimal zone for resolving that problem
before it gets bigger right because by
the time you're at even like a 5 or six
out of ten there can be a lot happening
in your body a lot of anger building up
that can make it harder to speak calmly
and clearly about the problem as it's
happening but when things are low level
it's easy for us to resolve them because
they generally aren't impacting us that
strongly yet they're generally things we
can go into conversations with people
about and have a fairly calm fairly
easily inoffensive experience of
expressing our anger and have things be
resolved in a way that doesn't hurt too
many feelings because it's just not that
heated yet for either person but in
order to get in the practice of doing
that you have to learn to bypass the
voice in your head that will perpetually
pop up telling you don't express this it
doesn't make any sense to do that and
that requires
potentially unpacking a lot of your
childhood history and the stories that
you've internalized around anger i think
that a lot of fearful avoidance have
been taught that anger is always bad
that if you want to have relationships
with people you have to have no
boundaries and so there can be all of
this false thinking around if i set a
boundary if i tell someone they did
something that upsets me i'm going to be
throwing that entire relationship in the
garbage and the thought of throwing that
relationship in the garbage is usually
much scarier than the thought of just
sucking it up and forgetting about
whatever you were a two out of ten on
the anger scale about so practicing this
is about practicing secure relationships
it's a practice of overriding that voice
in your head that tells you if i express
any anger or discomfort or resentment in
my relationships i will be abandoned and
left alone forever right and it also
requires acknowledging that there might
be some relationships you have in your
life that do follow that rule because
you have grown up and continue to engage
with people who remind you of your early
relationships so you might truly be in
situations where anger is not handled
well and that's why i also encourage you
to practice this with people who you
know are safe maybe even people who you
go to and say hey i want to start
practicing setting boundaries and
talking more about what upsets me
because i'm placing a lot of conscious
focus on becoming aware of that at this
point in my life so if i come to you
over the next couple weeks and i tell
you something i'm annoyed about or
something that upset me or something
that i wish were different i want you to
know that usually i only express anger
when it's really intense so you might
think that i'm feeling something really
intense about this small thing but
actually it's probably that i'm trying
to tell you about something before it
gets really big so i've been practicing
this a little bit in my own life and i
even like to just tell people i'm at
like a 2 out of 10 right now like this
actually isn't a big deal for me i feel
silly that i'm even bringing it up but i
made a promise to myself that i'm going
to practice talking about it so here's
what i feel frustrated about or
resentful towards you for in this
specific situation anytime we're doing
something new i think that it helps to
put a lot of safety cones around it but
the point i want to make for this video
is that i think fearful avoidance need
to stop gaslighting themselves and
telling themselves that their anger is
never valid the only reason your anger
seems invalid in retrospect is because
you let it build up until it all
explodes at one moment but everything
that was in there that built up over
time was completely and totally valid at
the time that you felt it it's likely
that it was a completely appropriate
reaction to what happened at the time
but when you add up a 1 out of 10 to 1
out of 10 and 2 out of 10 another 1 out
of 10 time and time and time again
eventually becomes a 25 out of 10. and
now you might be having a 25 out of 10
reaction to something that is only a 7
out of 10 reaction and you look
absolutely out of control of yourself
because you are but the only way to stop
that is to deal with it when it's a one
a two a one a one and it is going to
feel mind numbingly frustrating in the
process but that's how we work our way
towards security right we sensitize
ourselves to our emotions so that they
come out in the situations that we're
actually feeling them in as opposed to
all at once in a situation where it
doesn't necessarily fit so a practice
that i've been using quite a bit in this
area is radical honesty which talks a
lot about how to express anger clearly
and cleanly and in the moments that you
feel it so that you don't hold on to
that resentment inside of your body so i
am going to make some videos in the
future talking about my experience with
that practice and how it's helped me
quite a bit on the recovery track from
fearful avoidance but in the meantime if
you guys have any questions about this
or any thoughts or aha moments that are
popping up for you i'm always curious
about those so please leave those
thoughts in the comments and we can keep
the conversation going and until next
time i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
i hope you're validating your feelings
for yourself and each other and i will
see you back here again really soon
[Music]
you