hey guys heidi preeb here this week on
this channel we are talking about the
early experiences of each of the four
attachment styles so that is anxious
avoidant fearful avoidant and secure and
today we're going to be talking about
the early experiences of the fearful
avoidant individual now
fearful avoidance is one of the most
heavily i'm not going to say contested
yes i am i'm going to say contested one
of the most heavily contested attachment
styles in the sense of many different
people disagree on how this attachment
style gets formed as well as how early
experiences correlate to the adult
experience of the fearful avoidant
attachment style so we're going to go
over some of the different theories
today but mostly what we're gonna do is
draw on the themes that run parallel in
all of those theories because there are
more similarities than differences in
many cases when it comes to this style
so fearful avoidance is highly
correlated with disorganized attachment
in infants infants with a disorganized
attachment style were given that name
because in the strange situation
procedure which is how we assess infant
attachment these were children who did
not show evidence of a organized
attachment response so what that means
is that when they study avoidant infants
they find that they might show a
consistent tendency to deal with danger
and distress by disengaging from their
attachment system and trying to
self-soothe and anxious infants might
show a consistent pattern of elevating
their attachment style when they're
under distress and trying to get their
caregivers attention and securely
attached children might be really good
at contextualizing when it's time to ask
for attention versus when it's time to
self-soothe but disorganized children
were named as such because they didn't
show a clear coherent organized strategy
in any direction so it was not that they
were consistently trying to sell soothe
nor was it that they were consistently
trying to look for protection when they
were under distress and unlike the
securely attached infant they were not
able to really understand when it was
time to do which so what you might see
with disorganized infants is this kind
of approach avoidance pattern with their
caregiver where they might start moving
towards their caregiver when they were
scared and then kind of freeze and stop
moving towards them or kind of start
going in the opposite direction and it
appeared as though they were not clear
on whether they wanted attachment or
whether they did not want attachment and
of course theories began developing
around why this would be the case so why
would we have a child who is disoriented
about what to do when they were under
distress so one of the original theories
that developed around this is that these
were children who are afraid of their
caregivers so if there is danger in
their environment they might
instinctively start to get closer to
their caregiver which is in most cases a
secure attachment response but then
something in their body might kind of
remind them this isn't a safe person so
they'll freeze or they'll back away so
there is this almost disorientation
around whether or not they should go to
their caregiver or whether they should
stay where they are and try to protect
themselves from their caregiver now when
you're an infant your caregiver is your
access to everything in life so if your
caregiver is a threat to your
environment if your caregiver is
extremely abusive for example and you
associate fear for your life with your
caregiver this will of course create a
disorienting range of behaviors because
imagine if the person who was giving you
everything you need to stay alive was
also the person threatening your life it
would be very confusing trying to figure
out when do i do what because in some
situations they're giving me the things
that i need to continue staying alive
but in other situations they are
actually the reason why i think i might
not remain alive and again this doesn't
actually mean that the caregiver is
necessarily trying to kill the child it
can feel to the child like their
survival is threatened without their
survival truly being threatened but it
could also be the case that their
caregiver is truly that endangering but
the result is that the child does not
develop a coherent cohesive view of
whether attachment figures are safe or
unsafe and so it gets very difficult for
them to plan their behavior around how
to approach or not approach the
attachment figure now again keep in mind
here that the way children especially
infants process the world is not the
same as the way adults process the world
so as an adult we might say well my
caregiver wasn't that scary i never
thought my caregiver was trying to kill
me but put yourself in the shoes of a
one-year-old and let's say you have a
parent with ptsd or borderline
personality disorder or some other
psychological challenge that causes them
to kind of lose control of themselves as
an infant all you know is that you are
suddenly and unexpectedly in the
vicinity of someone who is 20 times your
size and who is completely out of
control of themselves now if you put any
adult in a room with an animal that is
20 times bigger than themselves and that
animal is angry and completely out of
control of their anger you bet your ass
you're gonna be terrified as an adult
you're going to feel like i don't know
what to do do i try to befriend this
animal do i try to run away from it and
that is the precise predicament that the
infant is in if they have a parent who
is out of control of themselves this
could also be the case if the parent is
sometimes on drugs this could be the
case if the parent is intermittently
violent with the child there are many
ways some of which involve physical
abuse some of which do not that could
cause the infant to believe that their
parent is a threat to their life and
that is one of the theories around how a
disorganized attachment style forms an
infants which could result in a fearful
avoidant attachment style in adults with
the fearful avoidant detachment style in
adults you see that same kind of
approach avoidance conflict so you don't
really know as an adult are
relationships good or are they bad and
you'll maybe kind of get close to
someone and then get triggered in a way
you don't understand and all of a sudden
want nothing to do with them or want to
get out of that sense of intimacy that
could be because your early experiences
of relationships they were
life-sustaining and other times they
were life-threatening so you might get
overwhelmed by a barrage of very
different opposing feelings within a
singular relationship as an adult
because your worldview formed around the
early belief that people you are close
to will not behave predictably and they
will sometimes behave in a threatening
way and a survival threat does not have
to be occurring for you as an adult to
feel an emotional flashback to that
early experience to feel scared to feel
threatened to feel for some reason that
you need to remove yourself from that
situation but one theory on fearful
avoidance attachment is that when they
were young the same person they went to
for comfort and support and having their
physical needs met was the same person
who served as a threat to them so what
they internalized about relationships is
pursue them you need them to be okay but
don't relax into them always stay on
guard stay hyper vigilant really notice
for signs that something might go wrong
at any moment and be ready to get out of
there the second that happens and
interestingly with the fearful avoidant
detachment style something that
characterizes this style is that they
become the most resistant and the most
kind of activated in relationships when
things are going right so arriving at a
place in a relationship where things are
calm and open and loving and
communicative can actually feel
terrifying for the fearful avoidant
adult because they believe this is when
something's about to go wrong something
is going to happen any minute that flips
this on its head so they might be prone
to sabotaging the relationship at that
point before that thing that their
nervous system believes is going to go
wrong goes wrong and it's really
important to note that this wiring is
occurring on a nervous system level so
it's not that your conscious brain is
saying get close but not too close it's
that your conscious brain might be
saying get close and then your nervous
system is saying i'm not gonna relax i
need to stay on guard and i'm gonna
freak out at the slightest sign of
danger and that's exactly what ends up
happening so the adult with the fearful
avoidance style still sees intimacy as
valuable in close relationships as
something they should pursue and they
might have lots of fantasies about an
intimate relationship but when you're
alone and you're fantasizing your
nervous system can be relatively calm
because it's not wired for attack
because that threatening stimuli
intimacy is not there but then as soon
as a fearful avoidant actually starts
experiencing intimacy that's when that
nervous system reactivates and all of a
sudden they want to get out of there and
this can be so confusing for the adult
who believes that they want one thing
but as soon as they get it all of a
sudden they're freaking out and don't
want it anymore and that is very often
the felt conscious experience of the
fearful avoidant who might get very
disoriented about thinking they want one
thing and then freaking out and feeling
like they're self-sabotaging as soon as
they get it that's actually because your
nervous system is now coming online to
protect you against attack the second
you get intimate with someone which you
might on a cognitive level actually
really want so there'll be this pattern
of getting close freaking out taking
space in many cases breaking the
relationship off and then once you're
alone again your nervous system is calm
you start thinking huh i could go for a
relationship i feel good now i feel okay
so it is very disorienting for the adult
fearful avoidant who ironically it's
like their body and their nervous system
can only tolerate the experience of true
intimacy when it's not present for them
when they're actually literally at a
safe distance from it and this is
different from the avoidant style who
doesn't have that same kind of conscious
drive towards relationships in the first
place they don't kind of crave intimacy
in the same way that the fearful
avoidant does so it doesn't create as
much of kind of an emotional
rollercoaster as it does for the fearful
avoidant who wants in them wants out and
doesn't understand themselves why that's
happening now again this is only one
theory of fearful avoidance it is not
commonly agreed upon that this is
absolutely how fearful avoidance
develops and it's also not commonly
agreed upon that this is the only cause
of disorganized attachment many things
can cause disorganized attachment
including not really having a consistent
caregiver so let's say in the case of a
child who grew up in an orphanage where
they never had one consistent person who
attended to them cases of overt
caregiver abuse but i also want to take
the time in this video to bring up the
dynamic maturation model of attachment
which takes a different view on
disorganization patricia crittenden who
worked under mary ainsworth who was the
person who developed the strange
situation procedure which is how infant
attachment was categorized developed a
theory called the dynamic maturation
model of attachment in which she argued
that many children who get categorized
as disorganized actually have a best fit
type within the system she developed
called the dmm that looked at the
categories of anxious and avoidant
attachment as more of a gradient that
had many sub-scales within it so you
might have a child who appears
disorganized in the strange situation
procedure but as they grow up develops a
very sophisticated and strategic
response to their family environment
that might look disorganized but is
actually meeting their needs quite
effectively given the family environment
they're growing up in which is not
necessarily a healthy environment so
essentially the theory behind the dmm is
that children are always adapting
themselves the best they can to the
environment they're given so it's not
that having an avoidant or an anxious
attachment style or even a fearful
avoidant attachment style which is not
an official classification within the
dmm but i will talk in a minute about
the kind of parallel classification in
the dmm but the dmm argues that the
child is always developing a strategy
that will help it survive the
environment it is in so a child who
let's say is actually quite anxious and
actually really needs attention from
their caregiver but who learn if i
display my anger in kind of a very cool
and controlling way i'm more likely to
get what i need than i am if i overtly
display my anger so in the traditional
model of attachment a child who does not
overtly display anger and vulnerability
might not be classified as anxious
however the kind of cool disinterested
persona that they're putting out there
might actually be a strategy designed to
get them the attention and nurturance of
their caregiver as opposed to a strategy
where they are truly not experiencing
their anger or their need like the
avoidantly attached style so the reason
why this is important is that a child
might look like they fall into a certain
attachment category based on their
behavior but the dmm places a really big
emphasis on looking at why they're
behaving the way they are what is their
end goal and to be fair the traditional
model of attachment does deal with this
as well but the dmm deals with it in a
lot more detail and some of the
attachment responses that get missed in
the traditional model get picked up on
by the dmm and in the dynamic maturation
model of development it is possible to
have what they call an unintegrated ac
strategy so the dmm does not use the
categories of anxious and avoidant the
same way the traditional model does they
use the classifications of a and c and
those classifications are actually just
the original categories that ainsworth
classified the children under in the
strange situation so when they first
began assessing infant attachment they
didn't say anxious avoidance secure and
disorganized they said this cluster of
responses we'll just call category a
this cluster we'll just call category b
and so on and so forth so eventually
cluster a became known in the
traditional model as avoidant cluster b
became known as secure and cluster c
became known as anxious so in the dmm
model we have a which in the traditional
model correlates to avoidant attachment
we have c which in the traditional model
correlates to anxious attachment and we
have b which in the traditional model
correlates to secure attachment but they
call it balanced in this model and it is
possible to have a strategy that they
call an unintegrated ac strategy which
means you will use in an unintegrated
way both in avoidance strategy and an
anxious strategy depending on the
situation now this is contrasted with
the b strategy who will use both anxious
and avoidant strategies in a healthy and
integrated way so securely attached
people use their emotions to help them
decide what to do and they use their
logic to help them understand what they
feel but with someone who is using an ac
strategy they're only focusing on what
they think or how they feel at a given
point in time so they are kind of
operating against themselves in many
ways because they might make a decision
based on logic and then later be in a
situation where it calls for them to
access their emotional self and then
make a different or counter decision
based on their emotional experience and
kind of ricochet between those two
extremes for their entire life in less
and until they do the work in
psychotherapy of integrating the parts
of themselves that rely on distorted
emotions to make decisions and the part
of themselves that rely on distorted
logic to make decisions because when we
integrate emotion with logic in a
balanced way we become securely attached
but something else the dmm provides
that's interesting in relation to this
attachment strategy which does kind of
loosely correlate to the experiences of
the fearful avoidant but is described
differently so again to make this clear
if you have the categorization of
fearful avoidant in the traditional
model of attachment you may or may not
be classified as ac unintegrated in the
dmm model it might be that one of the
subclassifications of the categories
that correspond to anxious and avoidant
in the dmm are actually a best fit for
you because again wherever there's more
nuance there's more ability to
categorize however if you are fearful
avoidant and you have an ac unintegrated
strategy in the dmm model there are
additional theories that come up about
how that may have been developed for you
so one of the theories is that adults
who have an unintegrated ac strategy
grew up in households where for whatever
reason they had to develop completely
different attachment responses to
different caregivers now this is really
important to note you do not necessarily
have to develop a different strategy to
deal with a caregiver who has a
different strategy than your primary
caregiver so for example let's say you
were raised by an anxious mother and an
avoidant father you might develop an
anxious attachment style in relation to
your mother and then you might use that
same strategy to try to form a
relationship with your father generally
the attachment styles we form we form
around our relationship with whoever our
primary caregiver is so if your primary
caregiver was your father meaning he was
the one that you spent the most time
with who most often fed you who most
often was responsive to your emotional
and physical needs when they came up
that might be who your primary caregiver
is for most infants it is the mother
especially if the child is being
breastfed because the mother is using
her own body to meet the infant's needs
but of course there might be a situation
where the child has two fathers or one
father or whatever it is and so it's not
that a mother is always the child's
primary attachment figure however
they're often the child's primary
attachment figure so we form our
attachment styles mostly in relation to
our primary attachment figure and if
let's say an anxious strategy works on
mom so when we really amplify and make
clear what our needs are mom at least
some of the time responds to that we
don't necessarily need to develop a
different strategy for dad if dad is not
necessarily all that important in
getting our needs met generally as
children we form our attachment strategy
around our primary caregiver and then we
use that strategy on our other caregiver
and if the same strategy that works on
mom doesn't work on dad we might try a
slightly adapted strategy and maybe we
find that works on dad but in the case
of infants who develop an ac strategy it
might be that for whatever reason they
really did have to develop radically
different responses to deal with
different parents let's say you have an
infant with divorced parents so they
spend half of their time at mom's house
and half of their time at dad's house
and mom is completely and totally
different in terms of what she responds
to than dad is i'm using very
heteronormative examples just because
it's less words to say mom and dad than
like mom who breastfeeds and mom who
doesn't breastfeed or whatever but of
course you can generalize this to
relationships that are not
heteronormative so there are situations
where the child is completely dependent
on the different parents for their needs
being met for long periods of time but
the parents respond in drastically
different ways to the child that could
lead to the development of an ac
strategy because they learn to use an
avoidant response with their dad but an
anxious response with their mom and now
there are these two unintegrated ways of
approaching human relationships that
might come out for the child in
different relationships as they grow up
but for myriad reasons that one's a
little bit less common just because
usually there's at least some adaptation
of the primary attachment strategy that
we develop that will work even on a
parent with a different attachment
strategy so for example
let's say a young boy might show
vulnerability with his mother in order
to get his needs met but he finds that
dad kind of doesn't approve of young
boys showing vulnerability so with dad
maybe he learns to bring out that angry
side of his anxious attachment strategy
more often and dad finds anger to be
acceptable in young boys so dad responds
to that so it's more likely that when we
have parents who have different
attachment strategies themselves we will
find different parts of our own strategy
to bring out in relation to them as
opposed to developing completely
different attachment strategies for each
of our parents simply because that is a
lot more work for the brain to do to
develop two completely different
strategies and keep them
compartmentalized in our brain so the
brain will always try to do what's
easiest which is why it's more likely
that a child will first try to use their
strategy in different ways on the other
parent and very often that does work now
another way according to the dmm you
could develop an unintegrated ac pattern
is by growing up in an environment in
which you did not have the information
that you needed available to you in
order to make sense of your experience
now this could also be the development
of an anxious strategy but in this case
it's often a situation where meaningful
information is being withheld from the
child in a way that causes very big
consequences for them so as an example
let's say dad is having an affair and
mom feels like her survival will be
threatened if she calls dad out on his
affair not because she necessarily
thinks her husband is going to kill her
but maybe she thinks oh i can't fair in
life without my husband because maybe
she's anxiously attached maybe it truly
feels like a threat to her survival
system to confront her partner about his
affair and to deal with the consequences
and the potential dissolving of the
relationship as a consequence of that so
instead mom unconsciously channels all
of her anger onto the child that looks
the most like dad and every once in a
while she just freaks out on this kid
and it doesn't really have any sort of
rhyme or reason because maybe the days
that mom is freaking out the most on
this kid are the days in which she's
most suspicious of dad's behavior but
the child doesn't have any way to
predict whatsoever which days they are
going to get harshly punished by mom in
which days they are not so again that
kind of approach avoidance conflict can
exist in the child's mind of does it
make sense for me to get close to mom
today and to show her my needs or does
it make sense for me to completely
detach and to try to self-soothe and
based on the mindset that mom happens to
be in one or the other might get the
child either caught in a giant rage
storm or have their needs met so the
child becomes unable to rely on logic
because there is no logic behind when
their mom is freaking out on them and
when they're not but they also can't
rely on their own emotional experiences
to be a predictor of whether or not
their needs will be met they can learn
to rely a little bit on both strategies
depending on what is going to get them
through a given moment the most
effectively and so they learn to always
be kind of hyper-tuned in to both the
emotions that are going on in their
environment with their caregiver but
also any clues that might point to why
this behavior is so erratic however
because they are never given any true
confirmation in either department about
why these things are happening the way
that they are because the true cause is
being obscured from them this might lead
to the development of an unintegrated ac
strategy because for it to be integrated
would require them having access to the
truth about why things are happening the
way that they're happening in their
household and you can see here the
parallels between this unintegrated ac
strategy and the fearful avoidance style
who is constantly kind of alert and on
guard for what might be happening that
they're not aware of now again the
anxious strategy in both systems does
also have that kind of hyper alert hyper
attuned strategy but what they're
watching for is signs that they might be
abandoned whereas the fearful avoidant
or in the dmm the person who has an ac
strategy is more trying to make sense of
the world using distorted logic as well
as trying to make sense of the world
using distorted emotion but never at the
same time and this is juxtaposed with
the anxious attachment strategy which is
always trying to use emotion to fill in
the blanks so they rarely kind of step
back and really detach from their
emotional experience and try to figure
out in a kind of cold hard logical
sequence why a b or c is happening in
their relationships the ac strategy will
sometimes feel completely detached from
their emotional experience and they'll
be able to analyze the human condition
from a very distanced viewpoint where
they can internalize some very harsh
viewpoints about themselves and other
people and then in other situations they
will be very centered in that emotional
experience and reacting very strongly to
it but anyway all of this exploration of
both of those systems is simply to say
that fearful avoidance learned very
early on in life that you cannot really
let your guard down you cannot relax
into intimacy in close relationships
because they are not reliable but also
intimate relationships are incredibly
important to the point where they might
be life sustaining to pursue them so you
ought to pursue these relationships but
also never relax into them and trust
them and this creates this very deep
inner conflict in the fearful avoidant
where they are constantly trying to
enter into relationships and then get
out of them in a way that might feel
very disorienting for both them and
other people and again it's important to
note here that this is not your fault as
a fearful avoidant you did not choose
this way of being you did not cause
yourself to have this inner conflict but
many fearful avoidance do blame
themselves and do feel like oh i must
just be a boy i'm just someone who
doesn't really care about other people
and there can be these very harsh very
harsh inner judgments that happen but
you're not enjoying this you are not
enjoying the experience of not knowing
whether you want to stay or go in any of
your close relationships of breaking up
with someone and then being panicked and
wanting to go back to them two weeks
later and not understanding these
humongous oscillations that you go
through that is not fun for the fearful
avoidant and they would not choose it
and if this is your style i believe
wholeheartedly and i know because there
is evidence on this that you did not
choose this style it would not have been
possible for you to choose it because
your worldview formed as a reaction to
what you internalized at a very young
age about intimate relationships and
then your brain became hardwired around
that now there is the opportunity to
change it and for the fearful avoidance
it is more work to change it because
you're dealing with both the avoidant
triggers and the anxious triggers so
it's kind of like you're getting hit
from both angles but the brilliance is
that because you do have access to your
emotional self and your logical self
there is at least a basis for starting
to work with integrating those things in
a healthier more accurate way so that
you can flip that world view because the
fearful avoidant worldview really is the
opposite of the secure world view the
securely attached world view is i'm okay
other people are okay and the fearful
avoidant world view is i'm not okay
other people are not okay so i can't
trust other people but i also can't
trust myself and because you do at least
have both of those world views in your
conscious awareness albeit at completely
different points so you might have
almost state dependent memory of these
different states of being with the right
help you really can work on closing the
gap between those worldviews by
eventually learning to keep your
emotional self online when you are
rationalizing and keeping your rational
side online when you are feeling strong
emotions currently if you are in kind of
active unconscious fearful avoidant
patterning only one of those parts of
you is probably online at a given point
in time but the more you work through
your attachment healing process the more
you're going to be able to eventually
arrive at a place where like the
securely attached person you can reason
and you can feel simultaneously and that
will help you make more holistic
decisions that will give you a singular
direction in life where both your
feelings and your logical needs are
accounted for at the same time but what
i want you to take away from this video
is that if you have a fearful avoidant
attachment style that disorientation
that confusion that kind of emotional
storm that you might feel like you are
perpetually caught up in is not
happening because you are crazy it's not
happening because you're a bad person
it's not happening because you just
don't know how to commit to things it's
happening because your very early
experiences of life were disorienting
and so your mind did the absolute best
it could to form a strategy that it
believed would keep you safe and that
strategy has followed you throughout
life and now as an adult if you can
consciously recognize this strategy is
no longer working for me because i am
now in a safer environment than the one
that i was in as a child or i now have
adult resources that will allow me to
find a safer environment than i was in
as a child that is a brilliant place for
the healing work to begin it is a long
process but the views only get better
the higher you hike right i also just
want to take a moment to acknowledge
that i made a video called 10 signs you
may have a fearful avoidant attachment
style and there were some comments that
it felt like fearful avoidance were
being criticized more heavily than the
other styles and i want to say
none of this is meant to be criticism i
firmly believe if you have this style
you did not know how to behave in a
different way because it was not modeled
for you and i also wholeheartedly
believe that every single one of us
would have done very different if we had
been in an environment where behaving
differently had been adaptive that's how
children are children do not make
conscious moral decisions they don't
even have the capacity to moralize at a
young age they cannot even think about
what's right and what's wrong they don't
have the awareness in their brain to do
that yet all they can do is react in a
self-protective way
if you developed a fearful avoidant
attachment style there is a 100 chance
you did it not because it was a moral
failing on your part but because you
were protecting yourself the best way
that you knew how and i'm glad that you
did that as a child maybe it's not
working for you anymore and if it's not
working for you anymore that's a good
thing because it means you are now in a
safer environment and you can learn the
new rules and the new reactions that
allow you to finally live in safety
right i have spent about two years now
working really intensively on my own
fearful avoidant attachment style and i
can absolutely promise you that with the
right help and the right resources this
can change drastically and the way that
you show up both with yourself and in
relationships can change drastically
even if it doesn't feel like it from
where you're standing now so don't get
discouraged if this or any of the other
insecure styles apply to you if you're
in the place where it's causing problems
in your life it means that you are in a
circumstance where more secure responses
are warranted and that's a good thing
that's a really good place to start from
all right as always let me know your
thoughts in the comments i am eternally
curious about where all of you are at
with your own attachment healing let me
know what other videos you would like to
see about the fearful avoidance
attachment style as well i'm currently
planning my next couple months of videos
so throw any suggestions in the comments
and as always i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourselves and
each other and i will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]