hey guys heidi preeb here welcome to
this channel if you're new here welcome
back if you're not on this channel we
talk about all things myers-briggs
attachment theory just any system or
model that helps us to see the world in
a new better more helpful way okay so
this week we were talking about
emotional intimacy and why the different
insecure attachment styles really
struggle with it so it's kind of
stereotyped that the avoidant attachment
style is the only attachment style that
deeply fears intimacy i think that is
oversimplified i think that the avoidant
attachment style is the only one that
fears intimacy consciously so what that
means is that on the surface of their
brains in their thinking working memory
systems they have a fear of getting too
close okay but that does not mean that
they're the only type that unconsciously
has a fear of getting close but because
this is kind of the most classic
intimacy avoidant type i'm going to
start with the avoidant and talk about
why they fear emotional intimacy so
there are multiple layers to this all
right and i'm going to kind of peel back
the onion as we go through this video
because there are things that they fear
that are more conscious and things they
fear that are less conscious for them
but the deeper we go the more strongly
it's actually likely to be impacting
them because the stuff that's right at
the surface of our awareness we can deal
with on a conscious level and we can
form strategies around that we practice
but what's unconscious for us is often
what we have more trouble changing
because we process it without realizing
we're processing it so by the time that
information arrives in our conscious
brain it's not direct and unmuddled in a
way that i'm gonna explain as this video
goes on so layer one for the avoidant
attachment style of why they fear
intimacy is actually about
self-regulation so using an avoidant
attachment strategy means that you over
rely on self-regulation and under-rely
on co-regulation and what that means is
that you don't necessarily turn to other
people to process your emotions to help
you feel better when you're struggling
with something instead you turn to
routines things activities whatever it
is you can think of that can help you
change your mood without having to
disclose to another person what's going
on with you but this doesn't happen
quite the way that it sounds like it
might happen and this is a really common
misconception so people tend to think of
someone using an avoidant attachment
strategy as someone using an anxious
strategy who's just like white knuckling
it through their need to talk to other
people and connect but because
avoidantly attached people learned so
long ago not to co-regulate it doesn't
actually occur to them to do that okay
it's not like they have a feeling that
arises in their mind of being upset or
whatever it is and they think i could
call my friend but i'd rather not i'd
rather just be strong and get through it
myself right that's actually more
similar to how an anxious or fearful
avoidant person would process a
difficult emotion that they want to
learn to self-regulate through for the
avoidant attachment style they have set
up their entire lives around being able
to keep themselves emotionally stable
without even consciously realizing that
they're doing that so you'll often see
with people who have avoidant attachment
styles let's say certain routines that
they're very attached to or they'll kind
of always be planning out what their
next move is what the thing they want to
do next week is they tend to set up
their lives in such a way that they are
always somehow giving themselves small
comforts even though that's not what
they consciously process themselves to
be doing so someone who wakes up at 5 30
a.m every single morning and hits the
gym and then meditates and then eats a
healthy breakfast what they're doing is
keeping their environment controlled so
that they can expect what they're going
to feel over a given course of a day and
they're not going to be too thrown off
course that's one possible strategy for
consistent self-regulation for someone
with an avoidant attachment style right
is making sure that they have a routine
set up that means they are going to stay
relatively emotionally stable even
through periods of upset because if you
know if you can predict what's going to
happen in your environment and you can
predict which things you're going to do
for yourself on a daily basis that are
going to keep you feeling stable
centralized and in control that is
emotional regulation right or on the
other side of things on this channel we
talk a lot about myers-briggs let's say
you have an avoidantly attached person
who is a perceiver they might always be
planning their next adventure planning
the next thing they want to do planning
their next business venture they will
have something constantly in their
awareness that is helping them to
regulate their moods so if they don't
like what they're doing now or if they
don't like their life at the moment they
have something to look forward to that
does not depend on anyone else to
fulfill and that's the important part so
all of these self-regulatory strategies
that someone with an avoidant attachment
style will not consciously recognize
they're doing serve the end goal of
keeping them feeling stable now the
problem with emotional intimacy and this
is what's on that top layer of awareness
for the avoidant attachment style is
that it threatens to disrupt some of
their routines and self-regulatory
strategies it also threatens to disrupt
their emotional equilibrium because when
you have emotional intimacy you are by
default kind of throwing yourself off of
balance a little bit especially if you
have managed to design your entire life
around self-regulating through things
that do not require other people's input
if you open yourself up to emotional
intimacy emotional vulnerability sharing
your life in your inner world with other
people these perfectly crafted
strategies that you have spent probably
decades and decades building up if you
have an avoidant attachment style are
suddenly going to seem a little bit
threatened what if someone sleeps over
and now it's a little bit less
convenient for you to wake up at 5 30
a.m get that workout in get that
meditation in get that healthy breakfast
in what if a relationship forces you to
disrupt your travel plans and now you
don't have that future thing to look
forward to and these self-regulatory
strategies that you have honed for
yourself over decades are suddenly
threatened a little bit by the emergence
of someone else in your world right
emotional intimacy naturally leads to
compromises and to factoring someone
into our lives because when we become
truly emotionally intimate with someone
else there is a natural sense of kind of
give and take that happens especially if
it's a romantic relationship where it's
kind of expected that you're going to
start combining your lives a little bit
so from the outside this is why
avoidance can look so uncompromising
right it's not that they don't want to
make room for a partner it's that they
fear losing out on all of these
strategies they've built their lives up
around that keep them feeling stable and
this is why you rarely see the avoidant
attachment style showing strong emotions
you rarely see them disregulated you
rarely see them expressing discomfort or
fear or angst because they have built
their lives up in such a way that those
feelings are at least on a conscious
level for them and that's important kept
at bay most of the time so layer one of
the avoidant fearing emotional intimacy
is that they fear they are going to have
to compromise the relationship they have
with their self and their own ability to
self-regulate if they were to take the
time and energy and commitment that it
would take to factor in someone else but
then there's layer two now layer two is
where we really get into the kind of
unconscious wounding of the avoidant
attachment style so people who use this
attachment strategy it's important to
note they did not choose this they do
not consciously know until they start
doing work on their attachment style
that a lot of the unconscious stuff
that's happening for them that is
causing them to push people away is even
there because it's not right on the
surface of their awareness but most
people using an avoidant attachment
style tend to have some form of disgust
response around emotional intimacy
here's why from a very young age we're
talking like under two years old usually
someone who develops an avoidant
attachment style has the experience of
having their vulnerability their need
their upset all of those kind of
emotions that go into emotional intimacy
being rejected by a caregiver this could
be outright right it could be a parent
looking at their child when they're
crying and going boys don't cry man up
you know or it could be more subtle so
let's say we have a parent who has an
avoidant attachment style themselves
they have been conditioned to fear and
feel discussed around intimacy and kind
of vulnerable emotions so they subtly
probably without them even being aware
of this are less likely to respond to
their child's more vulnerable emotional
needs so maybe when their child is happy
and excited and showing them things they
get a lot of positive attention but when
their child is crying or sad or showing
need they're a little bit more likely to
distance themselves or to kind of try to
quickly shift their child's mood so that
they don't have to encounter that sense
of internal vulnerability that they have
learned to avoid right because to mirror
someone else's emotion we have to find
and access that emotion inside of
ourselves and if the avoidant is afraid
of accessing that emotion inside of
themselves they're going to reject it in
other people so this is how sometimes an
avoidantly attached parent will raise an
avoidant child child cries parent shows
disgust that little baby brain starts to
learn very subtly but very quickly
vulnerability need sadness helplessness
all of those emotions get me rejected or
result in a disgust response from my
parent right so the child becomes
classically conditioned to associate
feelings of vulnerability and need with
disgust and that role that their parent
played in their early lives ends up
becoming a little voice that lives
inside of their heads but it's important
to note that this voice is unconscious
so a lot of the time someone using an
avoidant attachment strategy will feel
self-discussed very instinctively
largely unconsciously anytime they
perceive their own feelings of need or
vulnerability okay and that's very
important so i gave this example on
twitter a while back but i remember
there was this one summer where i was in
a new group of people we were all living
together in this kind of like co-living
environment and i have chronic pain that
usually i don't tell people i have um
until like the past couple years of my
life when it became apparent to me that
like people have chronic pain and they
talk about it i think maybe like a
handful of people in my life knew but i
got hit by this bout of chronic pain
that was one of the worst bouts i've
ever had so i was basically completely
out for like two weeks all i could do
was go from bathtub to bed to bathtub to
bed and that was the only thing i was
capable of for about 14 days now in this
time i was in a new community of people
and every once in a while when i would
leave my room to go pick up delivery
food that had gotten delivered to the
front desk of the hotel we were staying
at or whatever it was i would pass some
of the people in this community and they
knew that i was sick but they didn't
know how sick and there was this moment
every time where someone would ask me
how i was doing and i would kind of
panic and go oh you know i'm not feeling
well but i'm definitely starting to feel
better like within a couple of days i'll
be back to normal and i knew i would not
be back to normal in a couple of days
like there was no way in hell that this
was going to turn around in 48 hours so
it kind of became this thing where
people were always like well why isn't
heidi hanging out why is she just holed
up in her room because every time i talk
to people about what i was going through
i was minimizing it big time and acting
like things were just a little bit wrong
when in reality it was excruciatingly
painful for me to stand up for me to
walk to the front desk and get food for
me to even stand by the bath while it
was running like it was bad so one day i
was lying in bed and i was like i'm
gonna get down to the bottom of why it
is that i can't seem to let people know
how sick i am and i went and slowed
those moments down in my brain and i
would picture someone's face asking me
how i was doing and i would tune into
what was going on in my body in that
moment and i realized usually i would
say some form of i'm not doing too well
and then my body would panic because i
would see kind of the subtlest change in
someone's face where they were about to
show concern or they were about to show
pity or something like that and i would
get flooded with a self-disgust response
i would hate myself for eliciting that
emotion of pity or even of empathy in
someone else because it was hardwired
into me not to show any vulnerability or
need so the second that i felt like
another person was seeing my
vulnerability or need my brain would
rush in flood me with shame and then i
would say or do anything to get them to
not feel that emotion and not display
that emotion towards me right that is
classical conditioning it's what happens
when neurons wire and fire together if
your early experiences of need and
vulnerability are always paired with
shaming or disgust you're going to learn
to do that for yourself as you grow up
so in that situation it became this
whole thing where everyone just thought
that i was super anti-social because it
was so ingrained in me to feign being
fine when i was not but it wasn't that
they were actively rejecting me when i
was expressing vulnerability it's that i
was rejecting and shaming myself because
that response was so ingrained in me so
this is a very good example of what it
tends to be like for avoidantly attached
people around emotional intimacy i hear
people all the time kind of giving this
advice that like you just have to let an
avoidantly attached person know that you
won't reject them and that they're safe
with you and they can open up with you
but it's not about the other person for
the person who has an avoidant
attachment strategy it's self-shaming
and self-rejecting that comes into play
in those moments right so when it comes
to emotional intimacy it's not that the
avoidant person is going in going oh i
hope this person is someone who doesn't
reject me when i share intimately with
them it's that the act of sharing in and
of itself causes the avoidance to
self-reject on an unconscious level and
all that's going to come up for them
usually is that feeling of uh i don't
want this but they're not really sure
why or where that comes from and often
it comes up in the conscious mind as a
projection so they'll look at the other
person and go oh you're pathetic you're
weak why are you so vulnerable right
because they can't stand the idea that
they have those emotions inside of
themselves as well because those
emotions have been classically
conditioned out of their conscious
awareness from the time they were
extremely young which leads us to layer
3 of the avoidantly attached person's
fear of intimacy which is the feeling
that there is something wrong with them
that they can't quite put a finger on
but they just know if someone were to
get close enough to them they would see
it now this is deeply unconscious for
the avoidantly attached person as it is
for every attachment style who is not
secure but every attachment style who is
not secure absolutely shares this deeply
held belief just in slightly different
ways and what the avoidant doesn't
realize they're processing is the idea
that because they have emotions because
they have needs and weaknesses and
vulnerabilities they have shame at their
absolute core around that deep knowing
right they don't realize that every
single person also has those things and
that securely attached people don't have
that shame at their core around the fact
that they have needs and that they do
need to rely on other people we all do
so level three of intimacy fearing for
the avoidantly attached person and this
is deeply unconscious so they will not
be able to tell you this if you ask an
avoidantly attached person if they feel
this unless they have been doing work on
their attachment style they're probably
going to tell you absolutely not but it
is that feeling of something is wrong
with me and if anyone gets too close
they will find out so layers upon layers
upon layers upon layers of protective
strategies get built on top of that fear
right but where that fear comes from
once again is early rejection whether
intentional or non-intentional on the
part of their caregivers when they
showed up in the world as their needy
vulnerable baby selves and had those
needs and vulnerabilities rejected
looked down on in some cases bullied out
of them by their parents they
internalized those feelings are wrong
they're bad those indicate something
that is wrong with me but because
there's still that deep deep somatic
awareness that there's something in me
that the last time i was really
vulnerable got rejected they believe
growing up that any sort of intimacy is
going to lead to that same sort of
rejection and the problem is we have
that layer on top of it of self-disgust
and self-rejection so it's not like
someone responding positively to them in
moments of vulnerability is all it's
going to take to reshape that there has
to be this kind of conscious and
intentional process of learning to peel
back the layers until they get to that
core often that's something that it
takes a really skilled therapist to help
them through a therapist who is aware of
attachment theory and who understands
from the get-go this person needs to
start off with a more cognitive approach
they're not going to instantly be
receptive to any sort of intimacy and
then we have to move very very slowly
through the process of going deeper and
deeper and helping them bring out more
vulnerable emotion and then the body
eventually reintegrates the idea that i
can be vulnerable and have it be
accepted in certain circumstances okay
but that is a multi-year-long process
like this takes time and a lot of the
time i think that what avoidantly
attached people really need to
kick-start their healing journey is
someone who is first able to really meet
them on that cognitive level so for
example earn secures are going to be
your best friend here so i kind of think
of it as like someone who has really
intense substance abuse issues and then
get sober is going to feel a lot more
connected to other people who have had
really intense substance abuse issues
and then got sober rather than people
who have let's say always been sober
because they just don't like using
substances both of those people arrived
in the same place which is sobriety but
through two completely different routes
that are pretty much night and day to
each other so finding people who have
been down your route makes it easier to
connect with them so someone learning to
be sober is going to learn a lot more
from someone who has given up substances
than they are from someone who has never
used them and in the same vein people
who are trying to move from insecure to
securely attached are probably going to
learn a lot more from people who have
earned secure attachment by doing
attachment healing work than they are
through interacting with people who have
always been secure because their early
conditioning allowed them to be secure
from the get-go so if you have an
avoidant attachment style i think it can
be very helpful to find some sort of
role model whether it is someone who is
earned secure or someone who started off
avoidant who is currently in the process
of doing healing work around their
attachment style to help you model
yourself after because again that trust
that respect has to be there and often
avoidance respect each other so i've
noticed there can be this kind of
cascade effect if let's say you have two
friends or two partners less likely for
various reasons but possible who both
share an avoidant attachment style
there's a strong sense of mutual respect
there and then one of them begins doing
the healing work the other is a lot more
likely to now see the healing work as
something that is respectable and not
pathetic because this person who they
respect and who they know is not
emotionally disregulated all over the
place which is something that the
avoidant has trouble accepting is
engaging in this work and oh look it
isn't making them a giant mess all the
time so finding that sort of role model
can be extremely helpful for those with
an avoidant attachment style who want to
start doing this work and the reason i
throw that in there is because i think
it's highly likely that there are going
to be a certain number of anxiously
attached people watching this video
going how can i get my avoidant to open
up and be comfortable and trust me or
maybe some securely attached people and
i want to reassure you that it's
probably not going to happen until they
decide it's time for it to happen
because if you meet them in this place
of vulnerability and intimacy they might
even be okay with yours depending on how
you express it but for them there's a
very different process that needs to
happen for them to access those feelings
inside themselves it's a peeling back of
the onion and it starts from a place of
cognitive awareness so now we're kind of
veering into different territory which
is attachment healing work and this is
stuff that we will talk about in future
videos but for today i just wanted to go
over some of the reasons why avoidantly
attached people fear intimacy and what's
going on for them in those moments
consciously and unconsciously so if you
are watching this and you are trying to
draw emotional intimacy out of an
avoidant please know you are trying to
disrupt a pattern that is keeping them
stable self-regulated and secure and if
they do not consciously want to heal
it's actually not necessarily the nicest
thing to do to try to disrupt those
patterns because they developed those
patterns because they worked for them
but if you have an avoidant attachment
style and you are watching this you're
obviously already on the way to
integrating a ton of cognitive
information about attachment healing and
the next steps for you might be finding
someone you can work with who can help
you go through this process at the speed
that makes sense for you all right
that's all i have to say for today as
always i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and i will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]