hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
for the past month on this channel we've
been talking about self-esteem and a lot
of the different factors that go into
forming and maintaining a healthy sense
of self-esteem and today what I want to
talk about in particular is our
relationship to self- responsibility now
a lot of us particularly those of us who
grew up insecurely attached or with some
form of relational trauma do not have a
healthy relationship to
self-responsibility
we tend to ER either on the side of not
taking enough responsibility so feeling
kind of chronically victimized by the
events of Our Lives or taking too much
responsibility so believing that
absolutely anything that happens to us
is a problem that we alone can solve so
I remember around this time last year I
was at a retreat where a few of us
started getting into a conversation
about whether there are any personality
traits or any predispositions that it's
possible to overdo and one person said I
think you can't have too much
self-responsibility and I remember
hearing that and noting right away that
I didn't know what I thought of that a
lot of the other traits that people
threw out there I was like uh I could
kind of see what too much of that thing
might look like but with
self-responsibility I was like that's a
big question mark for me I actually want
to believe based on my own
predispositions that it's impossible to
have too much of that so I just decided
to live with that question for a while
and to start noticing over the course of
the next year areas where I saw myself
or other people taking what I believe to
be too much responsibility and what
happened as a result so essentially what
we're going to be looking at here is
what is the shadow side of self-
responsibility if we do this thing to
death which problems is that going to
subtly create for us that we might not
immediately link back to the fact that
we are overdoing this so a very simple
thing to keep in mind here is that while
agency is very important for a healthy
sense of self-esteem so is humility
humility is about being willing to align
ourselves with reality and be honest
with ourselves about which external
forces are impacting us and in what way
which generally means being aware of
which things are out of our control
particularly which things that are
heavily impacting us are out of our
control when we look at what it means to
have a healthy sense of self-esteem a
big part of it is having a realistic
self assessment not solely a positive
one which means staying aware of where
we lack power just as much as we are
aware of where we have it and where we
could take it so when we have too much
self-responsibility what we are doing is
trying to turn everything in our lives
into a problem that we alone have the
power to solve and generally we're doing
this for one of two reasons the first
reason is that we might have this idea
in our heads that the opposite of
self-responsibility is blame so if I
were to stop taking control of all of my
problems I might think the only other
option is to try to force someone else
to care about and take responsibility
for solving my problems and the reason I
might look at those two things as the
only options that are available is
because I might have a giant blind spot
around my own fear of sitting with
uncertainty so I might not even be able
to conceptualize the idea that I could
just leave a problem unsolved for a
little bit if it doesn't really make
sense for me to take complete control of
the situation when we are desperate to
solve every problem that arises for us
in life very quickly and by whatever
means necessary often we are doing that
because we are trying to bypass the pain
of being present with the problem and
all of the feelings that it's bringing
up for us so we're trying to dominate
our experience and gain control over it
rather than attune to it and stay
present with it and we're usually doing
this because we lack the skill to
effectively navigate uncertainty and
victimhood but uncertainty and
victimhood are absolutely natural parts
of life just as much as control and
action are and if we are trying to
eliminate those things from our
awareness what we are doing is cutting
ourselves off from from the experience
of reality as it actually exists and
this is an inherently disregulated thing
for us to do to be a whole and
integrated person means to live with the
awareness that we exist in a complex
ecosystem of relationships and events
and cultures that impact us in a way
that we don't have full control over and
if we're really committed to staying
grounded in reality we have to have the
humility to stay aware of that rather
than looking at absolutely everything in
our lives as a problem that needs to be
immediately solved but we're going to
get more into that in the latter half of
this video when we're going to talk
about how to get into healthier
relationship with self-responsibility
the second reason we might choose to
become over responsible in our lives is
because we're telling ourselves the
story that we are protecting either
another person or our relationship with
that person by taking on complete
responsibility for everything that
happens within that relationship and
generally when we do this what we're not
being aware of is the fact that we are
probably pretty uncomfortable or even
kind of terrified of dealing with the
feelings that would come up inside of
ourselves if we stopped overtaking
responsibility inside of our
relationships because what if the other
person can't give us what we need what
if the other person doesn't want to stay
in relationship with us if we're not not
staying responsible for everything that
happens what if they don't have the
interpersonal skill levels required to
stay in relationship with us so what
we're usually doing when we're
overtaking responsibility in
relationships is we're trying to avoid a
relational threat and all of the
feelings of pain and grief that would
come alongside it and again we're going
to go much deeper into that in the
latter half of this video where we're
going to talk about what some of the
specific things you might be avoiding
inside of your relationships are now in
reality both of these assumptions are
absolutely fundamentally untrue it is
fundamentally untrue that our only
options when it comes to tackling a
problem are take complete responsibility
or blame someone else and hope that they
will take complete responsibility it is
also fundamentally untrue that we are
helping other people or keeping our
relationships healthy by taking complete
control of them when we take too much
responsibility we lose our connection to
reality and we obscure other people's
connection into reality by being
dishonest with them about what's going
on for us so in the first scenario where
we are taking too much responsibility
over our own lives what often happens is
that we get stuck in repetitive Loops of
thinking or feeling or experiencing the
same things over and over and over again
because we're not accounting for all of
the variables that are at play in our
environment that are outside of our
control and because we aren't factoring
those things in and staying aware of
them and attuned to them we're not able
to make wise and integrated decisions
about how to interact with our lives so
we don't have access to all of the
information that we need in order to
make our lives run smoothly this is
where a lot of neurotic patterns of
thinking and behaving come from a blind
spot in the area of how our environment
is impacting us and then when we look at
the interpersonal side of things this is
one that's going to be really hard to
accept for those of us who air
codependent or who have learned to
relate to other people by solving their
problems for them but we are actually
doing people an incredible disservice
when we don't allow them to solve their
problems for themselves in pretty much
every scenario the only way that we
actually grow through our problems and
learn and develop as people is by
directly facing the consequences of our
actions and being forced to pick up the
pieces this is how we develop self
responsibility in the process so if we
are going into relationships thinking I
can't be honest with this person because
they can't handle honesty we are
absolutely trying to play God we are
denying people the learning experiences
that they probably need the most in
order to grow and so that's not a kind
or loving thing to do even though we may
have internalized it as such at a young
age and again in the latter half of this
video we're going to get into the
nitty-gritty of of why we might be doing
that and how we can check ourselves on
it but people who overtake
responsibility are like Mo to a flame
for people who undertake responsibility
and externalize a lot of their problems
right so people who have the opposite
patterning and believe that everything
I'm feeling is the fault of someone else
and again just like self-responsibility
externalizing is perfectly healthy when
it is appropriate and accurate to the
situation so it's actually a very good
thing to be able to know notice and pay
attention to and communicate what things
in your external environment are
impacting you in what ways but of course
it's also important to be able to take
responsibility for changing what we can
change so that's where we end up at that
secure Fusion point of taking the right
amount of
responsibility however once again if you
are someone who overtakes it you're
probably attracting a lot of people who
undertake it and it might feel like you
are helping those people by shielding
them from the consequences of their
actions because it's obvious to you that
they just don't have the skills to take
the responsibility that they ought to be
taking maybe because they have trauma or
whatever it is but when we Shield an
externalizers from the consequences of
their actions I kind of think of it as
akin to handing someone who is an
alcoholic a drink that has alcohol in it
and saying to them this is a
non-alcoholic beverage you are warping
their experience of reality if someone
is externalizing and telling you you are
the cause of their problems and you're
saying you know what I'll accept that
I'll say that yes I am and I'll go with
it it's the same thing you are warping
their experience of reality and a warped
experience of reality is significantly
more disregulated than a true experience
of reality that is painful painful
truths are still regulating for our
systems because we're responding to
what's actually happening so we're going
to move into how to start changing this
cycle and taking the right amount of
responsibility both for your
relationships and your place within
relationships and also for your life in
general so how do we get into right
relationship with self- responsibility
the first thing we want to start paying
attention to is noticing our motivations
when we find ourselves wanting to
overtake responsibility particularly
interpersonally so this might mean
asking ourselves questions like am I
doing this because a I fear that the
other person will make a choice that is
incompetent or that I'm unsatisfied with
or hurt by if I let them take control so
do I lack trust in this person and if so
why am I choosing to be so close to them
and that can be a really fruitful
question to sit with and integrate am I
trying to have a relationship with
someone who lacks the ability either to
regulate themselves or to deeply see and
understand me and meet me where I'm at
because I feel threatened by equality in
relationships because if you're taking
on a relationship with someone who you
fundamentally believe when you're really
honest with yourself is significantly
inferior to you intellectually or
emotionally You Are by default going to
have to overtake responsibility in that
relationship but the real question we
want to sit with here is what am I
getting out of that what am I getting
out of having an inherently unequal
power Dynamic and that's probably going
to be a much more important question to
sit with then how do I fix everything in
this
relationship you might want to ask
yourself am I overtaking responsibility
in one area in this relationship because
I'm undertaking responsibility somewhere
else so is this actually coming from a
place of hidden guilt rather than a true
desire to take responsibility in some
area am I overtaking responsibility
because I fear being abandoned and I
think that if I don't take complete
responsibility for everything that
happens inside of this relationship the
other person will just leave me and
again what we want to sit with there is
why am I in a relationship where that's
the Power Balance why am I not seeking
out more equal Dynamics where people are
equally invested and last but not least
am I doing this to avoid
vulnerability so am I overtaking
responsibility or potentially trying to
manage or control somebody else's
behaviors and their actions towards me
because I don't want to have to admit
that they are hurting me or because I
think that if I admit where they're
hurting me they're not going to care and
that's that's going to cause a lot of
pain and a lot of grief and might force
me to come face to face with the fact
that this relationship is not a healthy
one so am I overtaking responsibility to
avoid the pain of looking at the
relationship as it actually is and all
we're doing in this first step is asking
ourselves those questions and trying to
get more attuned to the reality of
whatever it is that we're dealing with
again rather than trying to fix it all
right away the thing we want to do
interpersonally to get into better
relationship with self- responsibility
is to switch our framing from blaming to
sharing impact so this idea of sharing
impact is something that comes from the
authentic relating Community where
essentially we're giving people feedback
about what it's like to be us in
relation to them in a given moment so
instead of saying you did this and you
need to change we're saying things like
when you said X here's what happened for
me in my body here's what happened for
me emotionally here's how I feel
processing that and sharing it with you
right now so we are not trying to
control the outcome when we're sharing
impact we're only focused on being
honest about what's going on for us and
communicating that clearly to the other
person so this is one of those things
that opens up some space in that initial
dichotomy we created between
self-responsibility and blame simply
being honest and sharing our experience
without attachment to
outcome but this requires us to develop
another skill set which is step three in
this process getting comfortable with
ambiguity and uncertainty so instead of
finding a problem and going directly to
solution we want to start developing the
skills for sitting with the problem for
getting to know it for attuning to the
feelings that come up for us as we face
that problem so this is the process of
just letting certain problems in our
lives stay as kind of open cases that we
live our way into the solutions for
rather than immediately trying to find
and implement the best fit solution
because often this is exactly what our
problems need they need breathing room
and the fourth and final step in this
process bleeds really naturally into
this we need to shift our Focus from
fixing to attuning to our problems so
what this looks like is instead of only
looking at what role can I play in
solving this we want to start expanding
our focus and be really intentional
about understanding the context that our
problem exists inside of so getting more
of a 360° view of the problem including
which factors are playing into it that
are outside of our control so which
larger system or context does this
problem exist within and the more
information We Gather about that and the
more aware we become of all of the
factors that are influencing the problem
the more resilient our response to it is
going to be because we're not just
slapping the first thing we can think
onto the problem in order to get it to
go away we're able to actually
understand deeply why and when it's
cropping up air go what we need to put
into place in order to make sure that we
are actually getting at the roots of it
rather than just treating the symptoms
over and over again in a NeverEnding
cycle so on a purely logical level
approaching problems from this lens ends
up making our Solutions a lot more
effective a lot more precise and a lot
more longlasting but the reason we often
don't do that even if we are highly
logical people is because we really
struggle to stay present with the pain
of
ambiguity with the pain of not knowing
in concrete terms how a problem is going
to get solved because the process of
tolerating ambiguity means learning
emotional regulation skills and
emotional regulation skills often
require us to need things from other
people because we cannot perfectly
regulate ourselves inside of an
uncertain system so if we are trying to
achieve perfect self-regulation we have
to make the conditions of our lives
pretty darn predictable and pretty
closed off to any uncertainty or
ambiguity the only way to comfortably
exist inside of a lot more ambiguity and
a lot more uncertainty is to have solid
Connections in place that can regulate
us through periods of uncertainty in our
material lives and the better we get at
this the better we also get at allowing
our emotions to just be whatever they
are because often the feeling that we
need to perfectly regulate our emotions
at all times is a direct consequence of
believing based on this being true for
us in our early environment that people
can only accept us and care for us if we
are perfectly emotionally regulated so
this is about setting up a completely
different social system for ourselves
than we may ever have had where the
thing that we once avoided the most
which is showing other people the messy
and raw and uncertain parts of ourselves
is the thing that actually has to happen
in order for us to get into right
relationship with responsibility and
with reality so I once had this
experience of dealing with a really
significant betrayal in a close
relationship and I remember talking to
my mom on the phone and she was trying
to sooe me and kind of comfort me by
telling me stories of other people she
knew who'd been through similar
scenarios and I remember at one point
just going can you just tell me how they
made it through can you tell me how they
dealt with it because I don't understand
how I'm going to process this how I'm
going to integrate it and she went well
they dealt with it exactly the way that
you were dealing with it they cried and
they raged and they called everybody in
their support network and they slacked
off on their responsibilities for a
while because all of that is just part
of the natural process of moving through
shock and grief and I remember sitting
there trying to compute that like there
was something my brain fundamentally did
not know how to accept about the fact
that just being present with our
emotional experience is a part of a very
important process sometimes in life
there's nothing we can really do to fix
or solve something we just have to stay
present with the emotions that come up
and let them run their natural course
because when we can do that when we can
live with the question and stay attuned
to our environments we start noticing
really powerful solutions that we may
never have come across if we just had
our blinders on and we're trying to as
quickly as possible take full
responsibility for solving the problem
without first fully understanding the
context and the unique needs of the
problem so this is about getting way
more accurate about where we actually
have power in our lives if we try to
immediately assume power in whatever
area we have a problem in we're probably
missing a better fit solution that
exists elsewhere in our lives if we
could just humble ourselves enough to
accept that we don't have everything we
need right now and to wait and to lean
on other people for support as we go
through that process this is where we
shift from overtaking responsibility to
developing a deep sense of wisdom and
discernment about when it's time to step
into our personal power and when it is
time to practice humility
instead all right I'm going to leave it
there for today as always let me know in
the comments what you guys are thinking
feeling any questions that come up for
you as you go through this video I love
you guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other the right
amount and I will see you back here
again really soon
[Music]