hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about neuroticism and today in
particular I want to talk about the
tendency for people to recreate the
dysfunction of their early family
environments in their adult attachment
relationships now it is well documented
throughout the history of psychology
that this is something people tend to do
so Freud had this term called repetition
compulsion where he suggested that when
we had trauma that we didn't consciously
remember often because it happened when
we were too young to make concrete
memories around it what we would do as
adults is unconsciously act out that
trauma in a way that would end up
recreating that original traumatic
experience in our adult lives and a lot
of different people have kind of played
with this term and this idea over the
years but essentially there tends to be
a general consensus that yes we have
observed the phenomenon of people
unconsciously ending up in dynamics that
look quite similar to what they
experienced when they were children and
here's the thing I absolutely buy into
the idea that there is a strong
correlation between the Dynamics of our
families of origin and the Dynamics of
our adult attachment relationships it
also makes sense to me when we have
phrases like we don't choose what we
want we choose what is familiar but in
general I am not satisfied with
correlations I always want to know why
especially when it comes to psychology
because if we can get at the causation
if we can figure out precisely where
this whole thing is going wrong then we
can start manipulating the variables to
our advantage so we can start getting a
different result than what we have
gotten in the past because when I was a
young student of psychology I remember
getting frustrated hearing things like
this because I wanted to know why why on
Earth would we pick something that's
familiar but terrible over something
that is different but wonderful if we
have these giant human brains that are
good at conscious reasoning why don't we
just use our reason to choose something
better and so what I want to do with
this video is lay out some of the
answers that I've arrived at in response
to that question over the years of
examining it so these are five very
specific blind spots that you might have
if you grew up in an insecurely attached
family Dynamic and you find yourself
replaying those same Dynamics without
consciously wanting to in your adult
life so what this might look like is
going into every new relationship
thinking I am going to do this
completely differently this relationship
is going to be healthy and it might even
feel pretty good and pretty healthy for
a while but then inevitably it devolves
back into the same form of dysfunction
that feels familiar to you so in this
video once again we're going to go over
five blind spots you might have that is
contributing to that as well as what you
can start to do differently to avoid
repeating the exact same mistakes
unconsciously in the future blind spot
number one is that you may have
internalized the incorrect definition of
secure love and so now you're going out
in the world telling yourself and other
people and truly believing it that you
want secure love but what you're doing
with your actions is actually eliciting
insecure forms of love because you don't
realize that certain things you thought
were loving and secure based on your
early Dynamics were actually a product
of your caregivers or your family
environments attachment or trauma wounds
themselves so to help us kind of wrap
our minds around this I'm going to give
a very silly metaphor let's say from a
very young age you managed to mix up the
terms for sandwich and spaghetti so
every time you saw someone putting meat
between slices of bread you went oh cool
they're making spaghetti and every time
you saw someone boiling pasta noodles
and putting sauce on it you thought hm
that looks like a delicious sandwich now
it's not that you were hallucinating and
seeing something different than what was
in front of you it's just that you got
the naming of that thing incorrect so
this might get really confusing when
let's say you go to a restaurant and you
look at the menu and you see the word
sandwich on the menu and you go yeah I
could really go for a sandwich that
sounds delicious but what you're
picturing in your mind is a plate of
pasta because you have those two words
confused so the server comes and takes
your order and you go I would like the
sandwich please and the server goes back
to the kitchen and delivers your order
and the kitchen makes you up a sandwich
and the waiter brings it to you and you
look at it and go what is this because
in your mind you were expecting
spaghetti noodles with pasta sauce on
top of them because that was the word
that you associated with sandwich and
you might start an argument with your
waiter and go I want a sandwich and your
waiter might be going I gave you a
sandwich and nobody's going to
understand what's going on because you
have the wrong word internalized for
what you actually want which is
pasta now this is very similar to what
happens when we go out searching for a
secure romantic relationship but our
idea of what a secure romantic
relationship is is actually an insecure
relationship so very often when we're
raised insecurely attached there are
things that we can recognize okay this
isn't healthy in our early Dynamics but
there's also a ton of stuff that we have
internalized as perfectly normal that is
in fact a product of insecure attachment
so then if we try to get into a
relationship with a secure person and
they start doing secure things that we
have internalized as insecure things so
let's say we came from a really
distanced family environment where we
didn't really put our needs on each
other and then we get into a
relationship with a secure person
they're going to start telling us about
their problems or asking us for help
with things and we're going to go oh
what's this I wanted a secure attachment
relationship and it's going to be like
having that argument with the server
where they gave you what you technically
asked for but you you aren't recognizing
that as the thing that you're being
given or let's say if you were raised in
a more in mesh Dynamic and so you grew
up never stating what your needs were
but assuming that other people would be
attuned enough to you to meet them for
you without you having to ask and you
would do the same in response and then
when you get into a secure relationship
you might start getting frustrated when
your partner isn't picking up on your
needs because coming from a more secure
standpoint they're expecting you to say
what your needs are and ask them
directly if you need help with something
and so you might start getting
frustrated and going this isn't a secure
relationship my partner isn't meeting my
needs without me saying what they are
when in reality once again you've
internalized something that is insecure
as secure and there's truly no end to
the misunderstandings that we might have
in this department and so you have to
keep yourself open to the idea that you
might have some blind spots in this area
and this was something that kind of
broke my own brain in the attachment
healing process I actually specifically
remember reading the book the fantasy
bond by Robert Firestone and coming
across this one passage where he was
talking about how in healthy attachment
relationships particularly between
parent and child the parents role was to
be present with the child when they were
struggling and to help them understand
what it was that they were struggling
with and build the skills to meet that
challenge with support and this passage
though it is probably the most obvious
thing on earth to a lot of people out
there absolutely broke my brain because
having had a lot of toxic shame growing
up I had the deeply ingrained belief
that the only way to be in an attachment
relationship and to stay in deep
connection with other people was to be
perfect and to push down all of the ways
in which I was not perfect hide them
from sight and only show my absolute
best side when engaging with people and
if I was dealing with a vulnerable
ability or something painful or an area
of my life where I was not yet perfect
the way to stay in connection with other
people was to either withdraw until I
became perfect again or to absolutely
hide that thing from them at any cost
and learning that one of the core
components of deep authentic intimately
connected relationships is sharing our
challenges with other people and being
seen by people and supported in our
navigating of them truly was a
challenging thing for me to accept as
the truth because it required me to
fundamentally change my definition of
what love was and so what we're going to
be doing in the process of moving
towards secure attachment is constantly
updating our definition of what a
healthy relationship is and this is
often going to mean arriving in moments
where we're getting frustrated because
in our minds we're going I don't
understand why this isn't working I am
doing all the right things I'm pushing
down all of my feelings of anger and
frustration and I'm only sharing
positive things with my partner that's
secure right I'm staying hyper attuned
to my partner's ever shifting moods and
I'm doing the emotional regulation work
that my partner can't do on their own on
their behalf so that they stay
consistently emotionally regulated as
long as I'm around because that way they
treat me kindly and if I don't regulate
them for them they treat me unkindly
that's secure right and I say all of
this not to shame any of us for the
insecure things that we have
internalized as secure but just to
encourage us to kind of deal with these
with a sense of levity as we go because
there are likely to be a lot of things
we have internalized under the umbrella
term of love and secure attachment that
actually belong Under The Umbrellas of
codependency or avoidance and we need to
stay open to readjusting our definition
continuously as we learn and grow grow
through our
relationships second reason why you
might unconsciously be recreating early
family Dynamics in your adult attachment
relationships is that if you are someone
who grew up with a significant amount of
early wounds related to attachment or
with a significant amount of trauma you
might genuinely feel the most seen and
mirrored and understood by other people
who also have quite a bit of trauma or
wounding and in the early stages of a
relationship before a strong Mutual
attachment forms which is when all of
our triggers and attachment wounds start
coming online being with another person
who is very significantly insecurely
attached if you are might actually feel
like the most astonishingly healthy
thing you have ever experienced because
this person might genuinely and truly be
much more capable of understanding you
than the average person you meet the
problem is that if the thing you were
bonding over is a shared trauma history
it's likely that you're now in a
relationship with a lot of triggers and
wounds and attachment patterns online
that might make it really challenging to
keep the relationship healthy and there
is a huge amount of variability within
this right at the absolute most
optimistic end of the spectrum we have
two people who have earned secure
attachment who are able to deeply
understand each other but also are not
in significant ific an ways still
operating out of their past insecure
patterns and at the really destructive
end of things we have two people who are
still really deep in their own
attachment wounding and as much as they
don't want this to be the case when they
meet and fall in love with each other as
soon as that deep attachment starts
forming all of that wounding and all of
those triggers come to the surface and
create chaos but what I really want to
emphasize here is that if you are
insecurely attached meeting someone who
is also insecurely attached often in a
complimentary way to you so if you're
anxious someone who airs more avoidant
but is approximately the same level of
avoidant as you are anxious is probably
going to feel like an absolute beautiful
match made in heaven until the wounds
come out and parts of that can also be
related to the fact that if we have
parts of ourselves we've repressed and
we find a partner who really exemplifies
those parts of themselves potentially
the expense of the things that they have
repressed that maybe we have super
online once again meeting and falling in
love is going to feel for both of you
for a period of time like you finally
feel whole and I have an entire video
that explores this phenomenon so I will
link it in the description of this one
rather than going too deep with it here
that one is about compatibility and how
insecure attachment can accidentally
have us choosing Partners who are wrong
for us over and over and over again but
in short the point that I want to drive
home here is that insecure attachment
relationships when both people still
have their attachment wounds fairly
online often feel very secure at first
in fact more so than being with a secure
person does and the ideal is that as you
go through this journey and end up doing
the work to regulate yourself around
your triggers and to make the things
that are in your blind spots conscious
you will eventually earn secure
attachments
and once you have earned secure
attachment and you still have all of
those memories of what it once was to
have trauma and wounds online you're
probably still going to relate best to
other people who understand what that's
like but you're going to be able to tell
a fellow earned secure person who's able
to regulate themselves and has learned
strategies for coping with their own
trauma responses from someone who still
has those responses fairly online and
that doesn't mean that you can't be
close to people who are still in the
healing process if you are earn secure
it just means that you're able to use
your reason to figure out who it might
be challenging for you to get really
close to because they still have a lot
of wounds online that they might end up
taking out on you unconsciously versus
who else has done enough work to be able
to enter into a healthy romantic
relationship and with less of your own
blind spots online it's going to get
easier and easier to Spot the Difference
In The Dating process third reason why
you might might unconsciously recreate
your Early Childhood experiences in your
adult attachment relationships is
because you might not realize that your
strategy for forming connections with
people would only really appeal to other
insecurely attached people so the kind
of bids that you have unconsciously
learned to make to get connection it's
almost like they're operating at a
frequency that only other insecurely
attached people can pick up on so those
are the people who are responding to
those bids and on the flip side of
things you might have no idea how to
recognize a secure Bend for connection
when it comes your way and so you also
aren't tuned into what types of bids for
connection you would need to be putting
out in order to attract more secure
people so I'm going to give you an
example of this there was a point of
time when I was in my attachment healing
Journey where I went to a silent Retreat
and one of the rules that the
instructors gave us at the beginning of
the retreat was nobody is allowed to
caretake each other in this retre trade
so if you see someone who looks like
they're really struggling or is having a
trauma response or needs help come get
one of the instructors and let them know
do not try to attend to that person on
your own and there was a couple of
reasons for this one was that of course
the instructors were trauma informed
they knew what to expect and what might
get triggered in people so they were the
most equipped at handling this but they
also explained that part of what they
were trying to do was to just get
everyone to stay aware of Their Own
desire to caretake as it came up and so
when we were given the instructions I
was like that's great no problem as
someone who does generally just
naturally track what's going on for most
people who I'm in a room with at any
given point in time it actually felt
like kind of a relief to be explicitly
told that I was not to do that and not
to take care of other people's emotions
so long as I was at this retreat but
what was really interesting was that as
the retreat stretched on and we hit our
second and then our Third Day of Silence
I started to notice that there were
certain people I felt more drawn to
despite the fact that I couldn't speak
to them and in particular I noticed that
there were certain instances or certain
facial expressions or certain kind of
energies people gave off that felt to me
like I would naturally understand how to
make a bid for connection with that
person so I kind of started noticing
these moments where if I could speak I
probably would have reached out to this
person and said something and what was
interesting was that more often than not
the moments where I felt that compulsion
to go talk to someone was when I saw
somebody looking kind of distressed or
like they needed help or guidance and I
realized that is totally what my body
recognizes as the go-ahead sign to start
being in connection with someone if they
look like they need help or guidance in
some way I want to jump in and see if I
can save them from whatever feelings
they are having and that is not at all
conscious that is not something I
thought through and decided was my
strategy for connecting with people but
I noticed that when I wasn't allowed to
do that it was almost painful in my body
like I had so many impulses where I
wanted to do that and this became a
really interesting inquiry around what
do I see as a door for connection and
which doors might I be not seeing that
are actually the healthier doors to walk
through so if I am compulsively only
forming connections with people who
struggle to regulate themselves
essentially I am putting out a bid for
connection that is not entirely secure
I'm putting out a bid that says hey I
will help you make sense of your own
feelings and someone who really wants
someone else to help them deal with all
of their feelings might go great my bin
for connection is that I will always
treat you as invulnerable and bring you
all of my problems and now we are in an
insecurely attached connection that
feels deeply secure to both of us until
it doesn't and so the art of learning to
change this tendency is to start
noticing how do secure people form
connections with each other what do they
talk about when they meet each other to
what degree are they vulnerable how long
does it take them to weigh deeper into
the connection and something that I
really want to stress here is that in
mutually secure Dynamics there is a lot
lot of reciprocity in the way that they
interact with each other so it's not
that one person is always capable and
the other is always vulnerable it's that
both of them trade off being capable and
vulnerable with each other fairly
regularly so that's the third thing we
want to be looking at is which bids for
connection are we putting out that only
insecure people would pick up on but we
also want to be looking at the flip side
of this which is which secure bids am I
not putting out that means I not
naturally attracting secure people to me
so a metaphor I like to picture when I'm
thinking about this is imagine that the
dating field so to speak is a literal
soccer field and right down the center
of that soccer field there is a line and
that line represent secure attachment so
all of the people who are securely
attached are kind of going to that line
and they're standing around waiting for
other secure people to meet them and
form Connections in a reciprocal way and
so part of what's required in order to
stand on that line is being vulnerable
and open enough to show up and say hey
I'm looking for connection I'm wanting
to meet someone here's who I am and what
I want and then the other part of that
skill is letting someone else come to
you and meet you where you're at someone
else who is open and looking for
connection and doesn't have to be chased
and when two people find themselves
standing in the middle of that soccer
field on the line of secure attachment
the stage is set for them to start
forming something that is healthy but
let's say you don't like the
vulnerability that you would have to put
forth in order to walk to the center of
that line and so you pull way back and
you're kind of outstanding by the soccer
net so you're not making many bids for
connection you're not going out and
pursuing people you're not putting
yourself out there you're not being
honest and authentic and vulnerable when
you are dating and so who are you going
to meet out there probably someone who's
really comfortable coming so far over
that line because they don't have a
natural awareness of boundaries that
they aren't noticing that you aren't
being reciprocal in their interest and
then eventually you might go okay well
I'm lonely and this person is hanging
around this section of the field which
for some reason nobody else seems to be
around so I guess I'll date them and
then you're going to be really surprised
when that person is not very respectful
of your boundaries when in reality a
person who was respectful of boundaries
would never have gotten close to you in
the first place because you are giving
off so many get away from me I don't
want to be in a relationship Vibes that
a secure person would just naturally see
thems out or assume that you just want
to be friends the only person who is
going to persist when that's the type of
energy you're giving off is someone who
doesn't really know how to read those go
away signals so it's probably not a
surprise if that person ends up crossing
a lot of your boundaries in the
relationship same goes on the other side
of things if if you walk up to the
secure center of the line and go hey I'm
here I'm open I'm vulnerable I'm ready
for a relationship and a secure person
on the other side goes hey I'm also here
and I'm open and I'm vulnerable and I'm
ready for a relationship and you
unconsciously go I don't want you to be
vulnerable You're going to walk right
past that secure person and look at that
person who's way far off on the other
side of the field and go they look like
they've got their stuff together and
you're going to ignore the fact that you
are taking 10 steps in their direction
for every one step that they are taking
in yours and that that in and of itself
is not a secure Dynamic so again what we
want to be doing here is not shaming
ourselves for approaching these
situations from an insecure place what
we want to be doing is just keeping
ourselves aware of how these Dynamics
are playing out for us
unconsciously so as much as possible we
want to start studying how to secure
people form connections with one another
and what are they doing that I am
neglecting or what am I doing that would
be a no or a boundary for a secure
person in a relationship are there
vulnerabilities that we're failing to
show so are we seeming closed off to
more secure Partners or are we not
stepping into our personal power and
setting boundaries in a way that would
attract healthy secure partners and the
last blind spot I want to encourage us
to watch out for if we find that we tend
to compulsively unconsciously recreate
our early family Dynamics and our adult
attachment relationships is we want to
get clear on whether we are putting the
right expectations on our
relationships because if we were raised
in families were either Community was
heavily undervalued so we kind of
internalized this idea of my attachment
relationship is meant to meet all of my
needs including my needs for friendship
and belonging we might be putting way
too much pressure on every attachment
relationship we get into the same might
be true if we internalize that
relationships all together were
unimportant and self-reliance was the
whole way to go in that case what's
likely to happen is we don't notice our
attachment needs until we are suddenly
starving to death to have them fulfilled
and just like when we're starving to
death and looking at food delivery apps
our discernment goes way down when we
are shopping from a place of desperation
we're not looking for what's healthy
we're just looking for food and on the
flip side of things if you're prone to
putting too many of your needs into a
romantic partnership what's likely to
happen is that as soon as you get out of
a relationship you're going to be kind
of desperate to fill that role again
because it's meeting a ton of your needs
at once so you feel kind of disregulated
across the bored when you're not in a
romantic connection so this is kind of
the equivalent of being in a four-person
startup versus a large company and
losing one employee in the startup if
that one employee is doing 25% of the
the work that keeps the entire company
running you need to replace that
employee and ASAP in a larger company
you can go for a longer period of time
with that role not being filled because
there are a lot of people working to
keep the company running smoothly and so
you can disperse that person's workload
in tiny increments amongst a bunch of
other people until you find someone else
to fill the role and this is what it's
like when we are securely attached and
we have healthy thriving communities
around us if we lose someone like a
romantic partner of course that is going
to hurt and of course it is going to be
an adjustment but we find ways to
redistribute our emotional needs across
the networks that we have available to
us so that we don't feel like we are
absolutely desperate to get someone back
into that role right away we can wait
until someone who actually fits the
criteria to knock that role out of the
ballpark comes along and
applies and to follow this metaphor from
the more voidance side of the spectrum
if you haven't been deeply tuned in to
what roles that person was playing in
the company because it is not your
natural tendency to stay a tuned to that
when you're interviewing new candidates
you don't even necessarily know what
you're looking for and you're going to
end up just taking a lot of shots in the
dark or hiring the first person who
comes along and seems to really want the
job because you don't want to go through
the process of bothering to recruit for
it and so looking at whether we are
putting too much pressure on or not
enough intention on our romantic
relationships can make a huge difference
as to whether or not we are ending up in
ones that we have consciously and
intentionally chosen or whether we are
out of desperation or laziness
defaulting to whatever is available to
us which very often means we're falling
back on our old patterns because we're
just repeating the same bids for
connection that we've always tried and
getting more of the same in return
without realizing it
all right I think that's all I'm going
to say for today on this topic though
this is far from the end of this list
this list could stretch on and on so
feel free to drop in the comments any
other blind spots that you have become
aware of or worked through that have
helped you approach your attachment
relationships from a healthier and more
intentional and aware place as always I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again really soon
oh