hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel today we are talking about
how to figure out where your boundaries
lie and set them effectively and I am of
the very firm opinion that this cannot
be done without being in touch with our
bodies why can this not be done without
getting in touch with our bodies because
boundaries are personal moment-to-moment
things that we need to be aware of as we
move through relationships the perfect
set of boundaries for one relationship
is a terrible set of boundaries for the
relationship next to it all people are
completely different coming from
completely different places and
backgrounds the way that they interact
with each other is totally different and
so it can feel like the Wild West trying
to figure out where your boundaries are
unless you learn to be in touch with
yourself and figure out how to use
moment to moment self-awareness which
comes to you through a deep connection
to your own body to inform which
boundaries you need to set at which
times in your relationships so in this
video we are going to look at the Bare
Basics of how to do that in order to
improve the health of your relationships
and allow you to stay maximally present
and engaged with those relationships in
every moment that you are in interacting
with them all right the first step in
this process is not a simple one and
it's not an easy one but it is a step
that will start making your life better
on so many levels I cannot even begin to
tell you how influential this will be
and that is simply learning to
distinguish how different emotions show
up in your body I don't mean what you
think about your different emotions I
don't mean the stories that you make up
in your head and what emotions you feel
about those I mean when you are in the
present moment actually interacting with
the people who are literally physically
in front of you
or when you are alone with yourself
getting very acquainted with what is
happening in your body and what your
body is trying to tell you moment to
moment
so this is going to mean that for a long
period of time you're going to have to
track your body States and this is not
something that you need to do with a ton
of diligence you don't need to stop
every 10 minutes and write down how
you're feeling but what you're going to
want to start doing is noticing when I
feel totally present engaged alert alive
like I am very happy to be where I am
and I'm not in my head too much what
does it feel like in my body
and you can learn to just start doing a
bit of a body scan in different
emotional states so when I'm energized
engaged feeling open and warm towards
people what does it feel like in my
chest what does it feel like in my
stomach do I tend to stand up more
straight or do I tend to be more
slouched and does my heart tend to be
beating faster or not quite as fast how
do my limbs feel am I shaking my legs or
am I sitting still all of these
different things that your body may or
may not be doing you want to start
noticing and learning to associate them
with certain states that you're in when
you are feeling sad and depressed
and low what does that feel like in your
body
what do your arms feel like when you're
feeling depressed are you taking deep
breaths are you taking shallow breaths
how's your posture
and the point here is not to judge any
particular body State it's to get
familiar with them all body States and
all emotions are important and they're
communicating things to us but a lot of
the time when we have not learned to be
fully present within our own bodies we
tend to ignore the information our
bodies are giving us and instead tell
ourselves stories about the situations
we're in and perhaps about the way we
want those situations to go and then we
learn to self-regulate with those
stories instead of showing up and being
present with how we actually feel in the
moment
so let's say I'm on a date and I really
wanted the date to go well and halfway
through the date I'm like yeah this date
isn't going so well right I'm noticing
for some reason that I can't put my
finger on I'm feeling kind of tense my
body's kind of clenching I'm not taking
particularly deep breaths it's almost
like my body is in some sort of a
defensive posture
I might have no idea why
I might not have a single conscious
thought about why my body is in that
state
but it's something to note it's
something to be aware of it doesn't
necessarily mean that I need to be
defensive towards my date it could mean
that my date reminds me of someone in
the past who I needed to have that
defensive guarded posture with
however the important part is that I
don't ignore the fact that my body is
reacting in a certain way if I don't
want the date to go badly and so I make
up a story in my head about this person
being completely different than they are
and start to self-regulate with that
story that is the beginning of a
terrible limerent disaster where I'm now
going to be trying to force this person
to be more like the version of them I've
invented inside of my head to escape the
uncomfortable body sensation I'm
experiencing in the moment and that is
going to get us further and further away
as time goes on from an authentic
real-time connection and the reason I'm
explaining all this is because I want to
be really clear that developing an
awareness of what your body is doing at
a given point in time in different
interactions is not at this point about
trying to change your body experience
it's just about learning the language of
your body and becoming deeply familiar
with it so that you are no longer
constantly fighting it with your
conscious mind and later on in this
video we're going to talk about why that
is so important for learning to set
boundaries step two in the process of
using body awareness to set better
boundaries for ourselves and this is
going to be the most difficult one for a
lot of people is getting rid of the
conscious mental justification game that
most of us are constantly playing when
we go to approach boundaries when we are
playing what I call the justification
game inside of our close relationships
what we are trying to do is determine
who is universally right and who is
universally wrong and then we are trying
to base our decisions about which
boundaries to set on what we believe to
be in objective assessment of the
situation based on principles that we
believe are external to us so if I tell
myself there's a universal right and a
universal wrong and I will set
boundaries around that which is
universally wrong and I will allow in
any behavior from others that is
generally considered to be universally
right then what I'm going to end up with
is a giant set of boundaries that does
not apply very well to my specific
situation and I'm going to be miserable
within them because I am not keeping out
what is important for me to keep out in
order for me to remain present engaged
and Alive inside of my relationship and
I might also be letting in a lot of
stuff that I ought to be keeping out in
order to keep myself present engaged and
Alive inside of my relationship so right
off the bat I'm going to give you an
example of this one because it can be
kind of difficult to wrap our heads
around this concept so there is a point
where I was doing a training call for a
radical honesty program if you've been
around this channel for a while you know
that I have used the philosophy of
radical honesty to help me quite a bit
in learning to get in touch with my body
States and my emotions and learn to
express them directly and then there was
a radical honesty training call I was on
one time where there is a member of the
group who had been texting me to try to
set up a call that we had agreed to set
up and I had been ignoring this person's
text messages
so we got on a call together and the
trainer was like does anyone have any
conflicts or anything that's lingering
for them before we get started that you
want to clear and get out of the way
with each other which was a very common
way to begin calls and I was like yeah I
feel really guilty that this guy I'll
call him Jim uh has been messaging me
and I have not been messaging him back I
have been putting it off and I feel very
like oh kind of guilty and distressed in
my body
and the instructor went it sounds like
you're mad at Jim for texting you and I
was like no I'm not mad at Jim for
texting me he has every right to text me
I'm the one who's being the jerk here
for not responding to him after I had
agreed to have a call with him and the
instructor went well do you want to have
a call with him
and I had to check into my body State
and my body was screaming no I do not
and I felt surprised as Hell by that
response because I thought in my
conscious mind that I totally wanted to
have a call with Jim Jim was an awesome
person I really liked him and yet my
body was saying no I don't want to have
the call
and I realized I have been feeling super
burnt out lately and I really really
hate online communication and I know
that about myself Zoom calls are the
death of me so it does not matter how
much I like someone or how much I want
to be in touch with them generally I
don't want to have a zoom call and the
instructor went try telling Jim that you
resent him for texting you and I was
like that's ridiculous I don't resent
Jim for texting me I just feel bad that
I haven't answered him she was like
suspender disbelief and try it
so I went okay Jim I'm sorry for what
I'm about to say
I resent you for texting me
and I tried it a few more times until I
really felt it in my body I resent you
for texting me
and I went oh my God that feels so true
and I realized in that moment you can
feel anger and resentment towards
something that you believe in your
conscious mind is perfectly reasonable
solely because it's not the thing that
you want so there was not a single cell
in my body that thought that Jim had
done a wrong thing for texting me I
quite like Jim as a person I had
explicitly told him I want to meet up
and have a call next week but when I
said that it wasn't completely true it
wasn't something that resonated with the
rest of my body I wanted to want to have
the call but that's different than
wanting to have it and what I learned
from that experience is that in order
for me to stay healthy engaged and Alive
within my relationships I have to learn
things about myself like what types of
communication I don't like now if I make
a new friend who I predominantly
interact with online I make a point to
tell them I don't like doing Zoom calls
I also don't really like texting I do
not want to keep our relationship
predominantly alive through virtual
interactions so if we want to get to
know each other I would like to
prioritize doing that in person if it's
too difficult to do it in person because
let's say we live in different countries
unfortunately no matter how much I like
you I'm not going to make it a priority
to keep in touch with you because I just
really hate virtual communication and if
the only way for me to stay connected
with you is virtual I'm going to start
to resent you over the course of our
relationship even though I don't
consciously think that that's fair but
the point here is that when we go
against what we want because we believe
that what we want is not justified or
what we don't want is not justified
whether or not our conscious mind wants
to do this we will start to feel
resentment for going against what we
want and it's going to be very easy for
us to project that resentment
unconsciously onto the other person and
start to feel an annoyed by or resentful
of them without understanding why that
resentment might show up as guilt and
feelings of like clenching in our body
when we see them and we know like oh I
haven't responded to their message and
that entire experience could be erased
by us just telling them here's what I
don't want even though it's fair for you
to want it and so I'm going to set a
boundary around the way I communicate
even though it would be perfectly
reasonable for me to communicate a
different way and even if the majority
of the world happens to communicate a
different way I don't let's say use text
very often and if it's really important
to you for me to text you back very
quickly we might just not be the best
friends for each other because there's a
pretty big discrepancy in terms of what
we want out of a friendship and what we
do and don't like
so the whole point of this step
eventually boils down to figuring out
what you do and don't like and using
that information to start informing
which boundaries you need to set instead
of trying to set a bunch of boundaries
based on what you think you should and
shouldn't do
the reason I do not recommend setting
your boundaries around the things that
you think you should and shouldn't do is
because if you are showing up to a
relationship out of obligation when in
reality you feel tense resistant perhaps
unconsciously resentful of the fact that
you are only showing up in certain ways
because you feel obligated to that is
going to create mental resistance inside
of the relationship that is going to cut
you off from feeling present and engaged
with that person in the moment that you
are there now there will always be
things in relationships every now and
then that we have to do for the greater
good for example I will happily text
somebody to make a plan with them and
figure out when we're going to see each
other next and I don't feel any
resentment when I'm doing that because
to me it's a necessary evil so there
will be necessary evils inside of our
relationships but a necessary evil does
not feel like resistance right it feels
maybe a little bit annoying maybe like
we have to change our energy a little
bit for a minute at a time but it does
not feel like this kind of constant
gnawing frustration because we are
showing up inauthentically and doing
things we don't want to do because we
have formed our boundaries around what
we think we should want and not want
instead of what we authentically like
and don't like and so the final but
definitely not the simplest step in this
process is bringing both of those skills
together the skills of moment-to-moment
body awareness and the skill of learning
to set boundaries based on what we do
and don't want as opposed to what we
think is right or wrong and using the
combination of those skills to
constantly set the boundaries that work
for us Within any given situation that
we find ourselves in and the cool thing
about this is that when you learn to get
really in tune with yourself and really
in tune with what your body is saying
you actually don't have to think that
hard about your boundaries because you
can very quickly in a given moment tune
into the fact that you do or don't like
what is happening and based on whether
you do or don't like it you now have a
decision to make about how you will
respond and that alleviates you of the
responsibility of having to mentally
construct this giant web of boundaries
that half the time might not even really
make you feel very good about your
relationships and the more that we learn
to do this to be aware of what isn't
working for us and what we don't like in
the moment and then to communicate
directly about what it is that we don't
like and either ask for resolution or
set an immediate boundary around it the
less we have to ruminate and worry about
what future interactions are going to
look like because we're going to trust
ourselves to stay present throughout
them and respond appropriately based on
the wisdom that our body is presenting
us with in the moment that the things
are happening so I often see posts
online that are something along the
lines of like what if I start dating
someone and I really like them and then
I find out that they're super insecure
really attached so we're a month in and
I find out they're avoidant and to me
that is such a mental question right
it's coming from someone who seems to
have lost touch with their body
awareness if we're staying aware present
and regulated within our own bodies
we're going to notice the moments in
which there's a disconnect between us
and our partners
we're going to notice the moments that
we feel like oh I really want you to
react differently than the way that
you're reacting if I'm telling you
something personal and you're making a
joke in response or you're changing the
subject
if I'm in my body I'm going to notice
that doesn't feel good that feels a
little bit like a jab to me and I don't
want to feel jabbed I don't like it
right I just don't like it
so I'm going to maybe try asking this
person hey would you mind not making a
joke when I say something personal I
like to have these conversations more in
Earnest and if they want to accommodate
that then that's great and you can work
with that and if they don't then what
are you going to notice oh I didn't like
it when they said that they wouldn't
work with me on that or I didn't like it
when I asked them to stop making a joke
and then they made another joke in
response
and so what do we do when we're
continuously encountering a situation we
don't like we set a boundary maybe I
don't talk to this person about personal
things anymore
and that might be disappointing if this
was someone who I was considering as a
romantic partner and I'm now seeing that
the things that are important to me
within a romantic relationship are not
things that they are willing to offer or
able to offer but instead of deciding
that there is a universal right or wrong
and this person is wrong for having
those preferences or for having an
attachment style that I wish they didn't
have I'm just going to notice that I
don't like it maybe their attachment
style is perfect for someone else who
also prefers to cope with difficult
feelings through humor but if I don't
like it it just means this person is not
for me
and it's my job to protect myself and my
own vulnerabilities through setting a
boundary even if that means picking
someone else to try to be close with in
that way
this work is not going to protect you
from having to make difficult decisions
feel difficult emotions and walk away
from things that you may have once had a
lot of Hope about but what this process
will help you do is develop a set of
boundaries that are authentic to who you
are and the way that you want to show up
in the world and have relationships and
it might not hurt to note that if you
find there are a lot of things people do
that you don't like and there are a lot
of times when people are unwilling to
change their behavior when you ask them
directly you might want to just do some
examining of what it is that you're
expecting out of other people and if
there are perhaps alternate ways of
getting those needs met or if maybe the
problem is that you're pursuing the same
type of person over and over again who
is unwilling or unable to meet you where
you're at but if that's the case the
worst possible way to go about trying to
solve that scenario is trying to
convince someone that they are wrong and
the way that they're showing up in the
world is wrong even if you're right even
if the person you're dating is like a
serial killer you're not going to want
to waste your time trying to get them to
change when what you could be doing is
going hey I don't like serial killing
I'm going to report this person to the
police and go find a different boyfriend
this is obviously a very extreme example
but to a lesser degree you see this
happening all the time right people
trying to change other people under this
made-up Banner of universal right or
wrong it is right to text this much and
wrong to text this much or whatever it
is in a relationship instead of just
recognizing this person's preferences
are not aligned with mine and the way to
set boundaries is to pay attention to
what my body's telling me and use that
information to understand what my
preferences are and where I need to set
boundaries to make sure that I can show
up to my relationships without
resentment unexpressed anger or
resistance in as many situations as
humanly possible so this is not easy
it's a complicated ongoing process that
if you are taking it on in the most
effective way possible you are going to
be financing for the rest of your life
because your body states are also going
to change over the course of your life
you're going to get adapted to new ways
of thinking behaving feeling and that's
an exciting thing and there are many
wonderful things that can happen in this
process including negotiating our
boundaries getting playful and inventive
with them but for now we are going to
leave it at the Bare Basics as always if
you guys have any questions or comments
or thoughts that are coming up for you
as you go through this video let me know
in the comments what those are or have
been I love you all I hope you're taking
care of yourselves and each other and I
will see you back here again super soon
[Music]