hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're going
to be talking about maintaining personal
Integrity inside of our
relationships so what that looks like is
figuring out the balance between our own
authenticity our own wants needs desires
who we are as people and what we need to
do and how we need to show up in order
to stay in close or even very intimate
connection with the people that we care
about in our lives now if you were
raised securely attached those two
things might not strike you at all as
things that are at odds with each other
but if you did not grow up with that
secure system in place it's really
likely that in some form or another you
struggle a lot with the tension between
your own authenticity and your ability
to keep connections strong and close so
over the course of this month we're
going to talk about this from a lot of
different angles and lenses but today I
want to start by going right to the core
of this and talk about what it looks
like when we find our own authenticity
or one of our own needs or wants or
desires is in conflict with what
somebody else wants so this could be as
simple as having a different idea of how
you want the night to go than someone
that you're planning a date with but it
could also be as complex as something
like the version of myself that I feel
most comfortable and happy embodying is
a version of myself that someone I'm
really close to takes effect offense to
or doesn't like or feels hurt by so what
we're going to look at is how we can
find the right balance between
self-expression and relational care
especially if we feel like some aspect
of our self-expression is going to hurt
somebody that we care about I want to
start out by pointing out that there are
generally two types of pain that we
experience in relationships and once
again this might feel totally obvious to
you if you air more secure and totally
foreign to you if you don't so the first
type of hurt that we tend to experience
in close relationships is the pain of
disappointment so of our expectations
going unmet or of plans getting canceled
last minute or of some aspect of what we
were hoping would happen inside of the
relationship ends up not happening but
then we also have the pain of feeling
uncared for so if our friends or our
partners or our family members feel like
we're just not that interested in how
we're impacting them or how the things
that we do affect them there's going to
be a direct relational impact of that in
most cases it's pretty easy to stomach
disappointment when we feel like we're
cared about and supported through the
disappointment but again if you grew up
in a culture or in a family system where
it wasn't common to talk about feelings
what often happens is that too much
pressure gets put on the things that you
do in a relationship so if we're used to
showing up for each other as our only
means of really showing love then then
if you need to cancel a plan or if
something that you want to do is in
contrast with what someone else wants to
do and you care about that person it's
probably going to create an extreme form
of inner conflict because if you don't
know how to reassure that person that
you still care about them and love them
and don't want to damage your
relationship with them it's going to
feel like the only thing you can do is
either put your own needs aside and show
up for them in the way that you'd
concretely planned or disappoint them
and have the relationship fall into
disarray around that disappointment
because insecure systems that second
type of care the care that shows up and
attends to the relational Dynamic itself
very overtly and explicitly is the thing
that shoulders the pain of the first
type of disappointment which happens all
of the time in life all of the time
plans change needs come into conflict
and to be in a secure relationship means
to be in a kind of ongoing negotiation
about which needs get attended to when
and by whom so this is a skill that you
absolutely need to develop if you want
to have those healthier more connected
relationships down the line but before
we get there we're going to look at what
happens if you grow up with more of that
in meshed patterning when you find
yourself in conflict with what you need
and what someone you care about needs or
wants from you and all of the stuff that
kind of comes up relative to what might
come up for a more secure leaning person
so let's start out in that moment where
you realize that something you want or
need or care about is in conflict with
someone you love maybe you want space in
the relationship but the other person is
really struggling and you feel like it's
not necessarily the right time for you
to be pulling back and taking space
because maybe you feel like they really
need you right now or maybe there's a
commitment that you made or something
you offered to do for someone that you
need to back out of because your own
circumstances have changed in a way that
now make it really challenging for you
to follow through on that plan maybe
there's something that your partner
really wants or needs from you that you
just don't feel like you can give them
authentically so when these moments come
up these moments where our authenticity
is in conflict with some part of our
connection to someone else what often
happens when we're insecurely attached
or when we don't have the relational
skills to navigate this is we
immediately become disregulated so all
of this kind of fear or Panic or anger
rushes into the system because we
believe that having a need that differs
from the need of someone we love means
that either there is something wrong
with us or that we should be ashamed of
having our own needs and feelings or
that in any case we're now in a
situation where somebody needs to get
hurt which might be true but what we're
going to talk about as we go through
this is how we can contain that hurt to
that first type of pain the pain of
disappointment without coupling it with
type two which is the pain of feeling
uncared about so very often when we're
in a dis regulated State our thinking
gets very neurotic so our thinking
starts to narrow and it feels like we
have less options than we have in
reality so in this case if we have that
in meshed patterning our thinking might
kind of zero in on one of two options
either I need to abandon myself in my
own needs in order to keep this
relationship strong or I need to tend to
my own needs in a way that is completely
selfish which means that I'm abandoning
the other person so we start seeing
relationships when we're in this
disregulated state as Zero Sum games and
a zero sum game is one where one
player's gain is always the other
player's loss so a very basic example
would be a game where you have $10 and
you have to split it between yourself
and the other player and there's no way
to make more money so essentially every
time one player takes a dollar the other
person loses a potential dollar there's
a finite amount of resource being played
with when we're thinking of
relationships as Zero Sum games we're
thinking of relationships as places
where only one person's needs can be
satisfied at a time if the needs
conflict with each other the problem is
that neither of these options that we
see when we're in this disregulated
state are either true or lead somewhere
positive because what usually happens is
when we go down that route of self-
abandoning and of putting our own needs
aside and Catering to what somebody else
wants or needs or when we decide to
suppress our ourselves in situations
where it feels like the person that we
are with the thoughts and feelings that
we have is not wanted or welcomed by the
other person this very often leads to
resentment and scorekeeping down the
line so we start thinking to ourselves
well I'm suppressing myself in this way
for you or I'm giving you what you want
at the expense of what I want which
means in the future you owe me or
there's some form of resentment that's
getting built in me towards you and so I
think that for a lot of people attra
they fall into when they want to stop
people pleasing if they've identified
that they are doing too much of
acquiescing to other people's desires
and they want to start living from their
own desires is that they're still
looking at relationships as a zero sum
gain and they're still stuck in this
kind of neurotic thought pattern so
instead of self- abandoning they might
go okay it's time for me to start doing
what I want and I don't care what
anybody else thinks and then we're going
down that other route of prioritizing
the self but abandoning other people and
not approaching the relationship with
care when our self-expression has a
negative impact on somebody so when we
start going down this route and we give
ourselves permission to disappoint
people to prioritize ourselves to set
boundaries all of which are completely
and totally normal parts of secure
relating so there's nothing wrong with
that but we don't combine it with a deep
care for the impact that our actions are
having on the other person that we're in
relationship with what often happens is
we end up hurting people in more ways
than one so we're causing them not just
the pain of disappointment but also the
pain of not necessarily explaining to
them in an embodied and secure way why
we're doing all of this or not helping
them understand why the relationship is
suddenly changing and not being present
with them as we talk through the impact
that our new way of being has on them
and finding ways to find a middle ground
so often what happens if we go into this
response pattern with kind of guns
blazing and this attitude of I'm just
going to do what's right for me and I
don't have to answer to anybody else
about it is that inevitably we end up
really hurting people because all of a
sudden these connection points that we
used to have with them were abandoning
left right and Center and they might
assume that that means we don't care
about them anymore and so often what
happens when we notice that pain that
we're causing other people is we become
further disregulated so now maybe shame
comes back online or guilt or we start
second guessing ourselves or fear that
we're going to lose the relationship and
this can lead to a different range of
response patterns maybe we freeze and
withdraw because we don't know what to
do when someone gets upset with us and I
think that in a lot of cases this is
where ghosting comes from when we just
don't know how to respond to the impact
that we've had on someone and we go into
kind of a shutdown state it can be
really hard to bring ourselves out of
that face the shame or the fear or
whatever it is that we have around
conflict and enter back into the
relationship so this can actually be an
exit point from the relationship that we
didn't want or intend when we just don't
know how to deal with the impact that
our self- prioritizing has on the people
around us another thing that's pretty
common is we ourselves might get very
disregulated by the idea that someone
else is upset with us and so we might
take some action that causes that first
type of pain the pain of disappointing
somebody else because maybe we're
cancelling on a plan that we made with
them or maybe we're expressing ourselves
in a way that they're uncomfortable with
and we're not really talking through the
impact of it with them and if we can't
self-regulate around the feelings that
come up for us when we've hurt someone
else another route we might go is trying
to get them to regulate us around the
fact that we hurt their feelings so
either explicitly or implicitly trying
to get them to soothe us and tell us
it's okay that we hurt their feelings
Maybe by acting more and more vulnerable
and disregulated ourselves and now we're
causing once again two types of
relational pain the pain of
disappointment and the pain of the other
person having to take the adult role and
do the relational repair when they were
the one that was hurt so if we try going
to the other person and let's say crying
and going I didn't want to let you down
but here's what's going on for me and
implicitly asking them to regulate us
around the disappointment that we've
caused them if that doesn't go well we
might split into the third response
pattern which is villainizing the other
person and this is something that I
think is actually pretty common but that
we don't often look at because if we
have too much shame to stay present with
the pain that we cause the people in our
lives one way to get rid of that shame
is to tell ourselves a story about how
the other person deserved it they
deserve to be treated that way or if
they have a problem with me doing what's
right for me then they deserve to not
hear from me anymore this type of
thinking temporar soothes the shame that
comes up when we can see that we've
disappointed someone or let them down
but it also tends to end relationships
permanently because as soon as we're
putting the other person in that bad
guide position inside our own minds
because we don't want to stay present
and Associated to the fact that we have
a responsibility to stay on the page
with people when we cause them pain
intentionally or unintentionally then
there's essentially no hope for
relational repair to ever happen because
it that point we're working with a false
model of reality that isn't going to get
us anywhere and so now what we're going
to do is kind of rewind the tape and go
back to that moment where we realize
that our needs or our wants or our
authenticity is at odds with the needs
or wants or authenticity of somebody
else and we're going to look at what it
would look like to approach this through
a secure lens so through that framing of
I'm okay you're okay instead of thinking
of Rel relationships as this kind of
zero some game where everybody's needs
are in conflict with each other we're
going to talk about opening this up a
little bit and exploring what it might
be like to play a positive sum game so
positive sum game is one where resources
are actually able to be increased
through collaboration so it's kind of
like saying here's $10 if you work
together to invest it well you could
both end up with $10 and that's how we
want to start looking at our
relationships if I have a need and my
partner has a need or my friend has a
need or my parent has a need and they
seem like opposites on the surface how
can we think creatively to get to a
place where not only does everybody feel
like their needs are reasonably
satisfied but everybody also feels like
they're cared about and like the
relationship has a solid foundation to
it so the first thing that tends to be
different right off the bat when we're
looking at secure attachment is that in
those moments where their needs are in
conflict with someone else's secure
people tend not to get
disregulated because they have that
inherent worldview of I'm okay there's
nothing wrong with the fact that I have
needs or that I have wants or that I am
a different person than the people
around me and I want to express myself
in different ways and they see it only
as a logistical problem so it's not that
one of us has to be morally wrong for
having the need and the other person has
to be morally right and we have to
figure out who's wrong wrong and who's
right to solve this instead of that
there's this deep knowing that it's okay
that I have needs that's completely
normal and part of life and actually
it's really important for the people
around me especially the people I'm in
close relationship with for me to make
sure that my needs are met because
otherwise I'm going to be all
disregulated and it's going to show up
in my relationships so it's really
important for me to attend to my needs
and I recognize that other people have
needs to and just because they have a
need or a desire or a form of
self-expression that differs from mine
doesn't mean that they are bad or wrong
it's also totally normal and okay that
they have needs so what we're looking at
here is not a problem of figuring out
who's the bad person and who's the good
person it's just a matter of looking at
how do we get everybody's needs met as
simply as possible and if that's not
possible how do we make sure that the
relationship survives a situation where
maybe I have to behave in my own best
interests in a way that hurts somebody
else so where that insecure patterning
might automatically go to am I going to
abandon myself or abandon the other the
secure patterning automatically goes to
thinking creatively around how do I care
for myself and care for the other and
what this generally looks like is if
that first type of pain comes up so if
you recognize I have to let someone down
here or I have to set a boundary for
myself that I know the other person is
going to struggle with what we want to
do is really hone in on that second type
of hurt and make sure that as much as
possible we are avoiding it we want to
make the other person feel cared for and
like we are willing to stay on the page
with them and hear them out and listen
to them as they share the impact that
this thing is having on them and let
them know that even though we can't
necessarily give them the thing they
want concretely we can still care about
the relationship and about the impact
that our actions are having and for a
lot of us especially those of us who
grew up with more in mesh patterning
this is a very highlevel skill to adopt
because it might mean working through a
lot of old patterning we have around
what type of person we believe it makes
us if we are ever to set a boundary or
disappoint someone so if we have any
type of belief that disappointing people
makes us a bad person it's going to come
out really strong and we're actually
going to have to make sure that we're
able to check ourselves on that because
otherwise we're going to be flipping
back into that old patterning of either
needing comfort from the other person or
freezing and getting really weird around
the whole situation or villainizing the
other person so we don't have to see
ourselves as the villain so we might
find that most of the work we need to do
around this skill is actually learning
to tolerate people being upset with us
learning to tolerate seeing ourselves as
the kind of person who could disappoint
someone else because in Secure
relationships there are tons of tiny
disappointments that happen all of the
time it's just part of being in honest
relationship with other people
communication challenges happen
mismatched expectations happen life gets
in the way and sometimes we can't always
do the things that we really hoped we
could do for someone and learning to
handle those situations with Grace and
with care for both ourselves and the
other person is a humongous part of what
it means to become securely attached to
uncouple the ideas that disappointing
someone means I am a bad person another
thing that might come up in this process
is you might learn that you really
struggle to stand behind your own
decisions so when we start acting in our
own best interests and other people
start reacting negatively to that it
requires a lot of character strin for us
to say you know what I know that this is
right for me and to be able to
communicate that to other people in a
way that is firm but
kind and again kindness is the important
part here but if we feel like anytime we
act in our own best interests and
someone questions us or gets angry with
us or pushes back at us we immediately
start to doubt ourselves to the point
where we have no idea whether our
decision was a good one or a bad one
that's another area we might just find
we need to do some work in learning to
get aligned with how to tell in our
bodies when we are making a decision
that feels right versus one that feels
wrong for us and on the flip side of
this something you might struggle with
if you air more avoidant you might feel
way more comfortable just kind of
backing off or dissociating a little bit
from the situation if you feel like you
need to disappoint someone because you
probably internally cringe at telling
other people what's going on for you
that makes it a challenge for you to
show up in the ways that they need you
to and you might not even be super aware
of that yourself right so the work that
might need to get done there is
sensitizing yourself to the needs and
the fears and the challenges that come
up for you that tend to put you in that
freeze or withdraw response and learning
to bring those things into relationships
and take them seriously so that your
partners or friends or family members
can also learn to see you as a person
who has their own challenges which is
probably not the image you tend to give
off most of the time because you're
unconsciously and systematically
shutting down your own
vulnerabilities now in terms of actual
process what we want to be looking at
when we need to disappoint somebody so
when we're in some situation where our
needs are in conflict with someone
else's and we go you know what now is
the time to tend to my needs for
whatever reason this is what's really
important and feels right right now but
I want to also make sure that the
relationship stays strong alongside it
so Step One is being very transparent
with the other person around what's
going on for you and again what we're
doing here is not trying to get the
other person to regulate us or soothe us
it's simply to lay out on the table
everything that's going on so that they
know what they're working with we are
not letting them down or backing off or
disappointing them for no reason we're
being clear and communicative about what
is that we're struggling with and why it
feels like it's in conflict with
whatever it is that they need or want
from us that might sound like hey I know
I made this commitment and I feel really
terribly about backing out of it and
I've been really struggling with my
mental health lately and I'm feeling
pretty overwhelmed and I'm wondering if
we could have a conversation around how
to make sure that this thing I've
committed to that I now need to back out
of doesn't leave you too high or dry
maybe there's something you could
actually do that would smooth over the
situation practically in a way that you
wouldn't be able to come up with on your
own right so it takes going to that
other person and kind of laying
everything out on the table and figuring
out where you might be able to
creatively problem solve to get to those
solutions that you might not be able to
think of on your own this could be as
simple as hey I really need some space
from this relationship but I know that
might impact you because we're really
close and as of right now we spend a lot
of our time together can we talk about
how me tending to that need is probably
going to impact you and how we can make
sure that the relationship doesn't
suffer too much because of this and as
soon as we're having conversations like
that we're now tending to that second
type of pain right the pain of not
feeling cared about people are often
very willing to understand changes and
boundaries if they feel like they're
being deeply respected and cared about
through the process of those things
being said so this leads us to the
second thing we want to keep in mind
we're doing this work which is that we
want to make sure we are overtly
expressing the care that we have for
that person and for the relationship so
letting them know here's what I need to
do for me but I'm not abandoning you as
a person in the process I know that the
actions I take are probably going to
have an effect on you and I care about
that and I'm going to be here to process
it with you emotionally even if I can't
do the thing that I once thought I was
going to be able to do for you and a big
part of this is learning to really
empathize with the person who you are
hurting and this is actually again a
pretty high level skill if you come from
an insecurely attached background where
you might have these shame beliefs that
to hurt somebody else means I am a
monster and so we want to do that work
of getting into that secure I'm okay
you're okay mindset where we can hold
strong in the belief that we are good
caring and okay people even when we're
letting somebody down
and when we can hold strong in that
belief it allows us to access actual
empathy so what actual empathy doesn't
sound like is this kind of stilted
therapy speak right where we're going I
need to set a boundary and I am hoping
that you will understand my decision
because this is what's important for me
what it means is finding the place
inside of ourselves where we can access
genuine authentic kindness and we can
put ourselves in the shoes of the person
that we're disappointing and really ask
ourselves the question what do I think
that is like for them and how can I make
sure that I'm still showing up for them
in a way that makes them know I care
what would I really need in that
situation what pain might I be in and
how might somebody be able to soo that
pain for me even well holding their own
boundary around this thing that I'm
disappointed around so again this is
about working through the shame and
guilt that comes up for us so that we
can access actual embodied real time
empathy for the people that we are
letting down which is going to make the
fourth and final step of this process a
million times easier which is the
process of relational repair so if we
have actually hurt somebody if we have
disappointed someone in a way that is
very significant there's likely repair
work that needs to get done in that
relationship so we have to think to
ourselves how has this impacted the
other person and what might i' be able
to do to make it up to them on either a
practical level or an emotional level or
in a lot of cases both so if I've backed
out of something last minute can I help
them find an alternate solution and if
not can I look at what it might look
like in the future for me to rebuild
trust with this person maybe that means
getting honest with yourself if you tend
to overcommit to things and figuring out
how to stop that process so that you can
authentically go back to that person and
have a plan for rebuilding your trust
with them going forward maybe it means
getting real with yourself about the
fact that other people tend to not know
what's going on for you and so they can
be really hurt when you let them down
because you aren't upfront with them
about how much you're dealing with or
struggling with and so the repair has to
be around bringing more of that into the
relationship in the future so they have
more context as to why they're being let
down and they aren't taking it
personally because they have no other
explanation
so whatever it is that it feels like you
need to bring more of into the
relationship in order for the other
person to feel like they're cared for
and that second type of pain is not
happening even when the first type of
pain has to this is the work of
relational repair and it's going to look
unique to every situation but here's the
thing this process on a small level
happens all of the time in Secure
relationships it is part of what makes
makes a relationship secure is that
people feel like they can be honest and
open about the areas where their needs
or their self-expression are in conflict
with each other and they can find ways
to care about both themselves and the
other person
simultaneously so that when they need to
disappoint each other or even when
there's no way to avoid hurting each
other they still feel respected by each
other and they still feel like the
relationship itself has a strong
Foundation that can absorb things
like hurt and disappointment and
mismatched
expectations relationships are at their
strongest when they're able to withstand
a lot of these type one pains and the
more that they're discussed and put out
in the open the more you figure out
together how to avoid this in the future
because if you're aware of what's going
on for yourself and what's going on for
the other person with increasingly
greater context and Nuance it means
you're not only better at anticipating
where your needs might soon come into
into conflict you're also better at
collectively figuring out Creative
Solutions to your problems because you
are playing that positive SU game with
flexibility and creative thinking and
once again the reason why secure
relationships involve so many need
negotiations like this are because both
people understand that it's actually
kind of their social responsibility to
keep themselves feeling regulated and
resourced because when we are constantly
self- abandoning it means we're
depleting the resource that we have to
show up for other people in an authentic
way and over time that really depletes
our stamina and can lead to things like
depression or anxiety or other
challenges that make it really hard for
us to show up for ourselves and other
people so setting those boundaries being
clear with what we need and making sure
that we are prioritizing our own
well-being well caring for the people
around us and the impact that we have on
those people is preventative relational
work we're preventing these burn points
that could come up down the line if
we're not attending to these things in
the moment even when it's uncomfortable
to do so all right I think I'm going to
leave it at that for today as always let
me know in the comments any questions
you guys have as you go through this any
thoughts that are popping up I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again really soon
[Music]