hey guys I'm Heidi Priebe welcome back
to my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here I just want to
acknowledge first of all that I am at a
retreat right now so I'm coming at you
from a different location than usual
I've had people comment saying I like
that you're always sitting in the same
spot wearing the same shirt and I
personally love that in other people's
videos I love consistency in little
things like that so I brought the same
shirt that I usually wear but I am in a
different room now that we've cleared
that out of the way let's get to the
topic of today's video today I wanted to
go over some of the things that securely
attached people naturally look for in
Partnerships so when we talk about
attachment Theory a lot of what we leave
out of the picture is secure processing
we talk a lot about the problem but not
quite as much about the solution or
about that end place that a lot of us
who are on attachment healing Journeys
are trying to get to which is secure
relating and what I want to make clear
right off the bat before I dive into
these 10 things is that to be securely
at attached means that you are tuning
into your own emotion and logic around
the decisions you make so what I
commonly see online is a lot of
discussion about kind of objective
traits or things that we should look for
in other people when we're getting to
know them or when we're starting to date
them and something really important that
I think gets missed is that the secure
world view involves a self-trust so a
sense of I can trust my own emotions I
can trust the way I feel around a person
to give me good information about
whether or not they're a good fit for me
and I use my logic to analyze if my
heart is pulling me in one direction
does that really make sense so the
secure world view is one that integrates
both cognition and logic as well as
emotion so as we go through this list
you're going to notice that some of
these things are very emotion based and
some of them are more practical or more
logical and the reason that's the case
is because four securely attach people
those are both very important things to
keep in mind you're also going to notice
this list is highly open to
interpretation so for each secure person
there's still going to be people they
just aren't compatible with people who
have different lifestyle preferences
than them people who want different
things in them and so part of this is
going to be just drawing our awareness
to the areas where we might need to get
some clarity with ourselves on what type
of relationship we're looking for the
way that secure people are more Adept at
just naturally feeling into but without
any further explanation of all of that I
will get into 10 things that securely
attach people tend to take into account
when they're looking to find a long-term
partner number one securely attach
people naturally seek out people who
want to have the same level of intimacy
as they do in a close relationship so
again there are still personality
differences between different people who
have secure attachment Styles some err
on the more sentimental emotional side
of things and some err on the more
logical side of things however one of
the key criteria secure people tend to
keep in mind and look out for is someone
who wants to have the same type of
emotional connection as they do so this
might mean someone who wants a lot of
co-regulating a lot of talking about
feelings a lot of processing things or
it might look like someone who wants
less of that so it's not about finding
someone who is either super emotional or
super not emotional it's about finding
someone who wants to exist within the
same sort of range as you do and again
if you're securely attached you
generally have a pretty clear idea of
what that range is so if you meet
someone and you like them a lot but they
want either way more closeness or way
less closeness than you do if you're
securely attached that's probably going
to be a deal breaker if you're looking
for a long-term partner but that also
doesn't mean that you write that person
off as a human being it might just mean
there's someone who you have more of an
acquaintance ship or a friendship
relationship with rather than a
committed long-term partnership thing
number two that securely attached people
tend to seek out in close long-term
relationships is someone who to a
reasonable extent has their life
together and I want to be clear this
doesn't mean that the person has to be
super successful it also does not mean
that the person is invulnerable however
what you often don't see coming online
with secure attachment is a savior
complex and that's really what I want to
highlight here so those who air insecure
can be very prone to codependent
Dynamics I need you and you need me in
some sort of way that means we can't
fulfill our individual needs on our own
air go we will pair up and let's say I
will meet all of your emotional needs
and you will meet all of my needs for
strength and stoicism or whatever it is
and together we will be a unit that
functions well whereas we don't function
well individually finding someone who
needs you to be okay is not a green
light for those who air secure and again
it's not that they're not okay with
people leaning on them or they're not
okay lending help where help is due
however they're going to be naturally
averse to going into to more codependent
Dynamics so as a general rule they're
going to look for someone who either has
their life together or is aware of the
ways in which their life is not together
at the moment and has a concrete
realistic plan for getting to that place
and the reason for this is that secure
partnership is looked at as both an
emotional and a practical commitment so
you want someone who you can work with
or who you see has the potential to work
with you in order to make sure that your
Mutual needs are being met if you do
become a couple and you end up relying
on each other for your Safety and
Security needs and again there can be a
lot of flexibility and Nuance within
that however it is generally going to be
a turn off to those who air secure when
someone does not have their life
together and has no interest in getting
it together but rather either wants to
be rescued or saved emotionally or
practically or who wants to do the
rescuing or saving because maybe that
feels easier than more vulnerable
intimate forms of connection thing
number three that securely attached
people look for inside of long-term
party Partners is someone who they just
like being around and this sounds
ridiculous to say out loud however I
really don't think that most insecurely
attached people take this into account
very heavily when they're choosing
Partners when you are choosing Partners
from a place of early wounding when you
are repeating the patterns of your Early
Childhood that weren't necessarily
positive you're not generally looking at
whether or not you enjoy being around
the people who you end up dating it
might even feel very confusing to you
why you're continuously attracted to
people who you wouldn't choose as
friends however with secure attachment
this is potentially the number one thing
they are looking for is just a sense of
natural compatibility so can I sit with
this person and just talk to them the
way I would talk to a close friend for
hours at a time when I'm finished
hanging out with them do I feel happy
and uplifted and like I've had a strong
social bond with them or is the
intensity of our relationship the only
thing that keeps us together if so
you're likely looking at an insecurely
attached relationship however however
secure attachment is generally a pretty
low intensity thing you don't feel this
kind of wild crazy out of control can't
live without you love you feel a sense
of affection attraction and trust and
you're generally picking someone who you
would enjoy having in your life even if
you weren't in a romantic relationship
with them thing number four securely
attached people tend to look for in
romantic relationships someone who wants
the same lifestyle as them so someone
who wants to spend money in the same way
who has similar plans for the future who
enjoy similar activities to the ones
that they enjoy again this might sound
ridiculous to you if you are secure and
you aren't aware that there are people
out there who don't Factor this in
however I see in a lot of insecure
relationships two people who want
totally different things and who cannot
have a single coherent conversation
about it without it breaking out into
arguing or many who just avoid the topic
altogether however when you are secure
you are looking for a partner who shares
the things that you like to do in life
so maybe you have the same Hobbies or
passions or things that you like to talk
about but there is generally a strong
sense of alignment in terms of the kind
of life that you want to live so while
there are exceptions to this rule
generally as a base rule securely attach
people have an element of logic to their
decisions where they go here's the life
that I want to live I know what matters
to me I know what kind of community I
want what kind of job I want to work
whatever it is if not specifically
within a general range and finding a
partner who shares a lot of those values
or interests is at the Forefront of
their mind in approximately equal
measure to how they feel about people
they meet because again for secure
people there is a strongly practical
element to long-term partnership they're
looking for a balance between how they
feel and what makes sense thing number
five that securely attached people tend
to look for inside of long-term romantic
Partnerships is someone who can mirror
them back to themselves relatively
accurately so someone who has enough in
common with them that they're able to
feel truly seen and when they share with
their partner they feel as though their
partner really gets them and is able to
give them meaningful feedback meaningful
advice and meaningful Comfort when life
gets difficult of course nobody's going
to be perfect at this however a really
strong measure of compatibility is how
well two people are able to see and
understand each other without having to
go to humongously Great Lengths and
insecure Partnerships there's generally
a sense that each person has a fairly
good understanding of the other and the
areas in which they don't understand
each other they're able to communicate
through a lot of co-regulating is about
being seen accurately and having your
inner experience mirrored back to you
through another person so on a day when
you're feeling upset can your partner
remind you of who you are when you're
not feeling kind of often dysregulated
can they give you meaningful advice
because they truly see who you are all
of these things are things that are very
important inside of secure Partnerships
but sometimes get missed entirely inside
of insecure relationships and in many
many cases in insecure relationships our
worst fear is being truly seen and
mirrored back to by another person so we
might unconsciously choose Partners who
we know could never do that for us
especially if we have that toxic shame
piece right if I believe at my core that
if anyone truly saw me they would be
disgusted by me or they would never be
able to love me it's a pretty good
strategy to pick Partners who I know for
whatever reason will never really be
able to truly see me right and you see a
lot of that going on in insecure dating
sixth thing that securely attached
people tend to look for in their
romantic Partnerships someone who has a
strong support network outside of the
relationship so whether that means they
have a job that they feel really
connected to with co-workers who they
have strong relationships with whether
that means they're close to their family
whether it means they have a strong
social Community generally insecure
relationships partners are not each
other's only form of social support in
fact it's incredibly important to have
outside sources of social support should
anything happen between you and your
partner or two you are your partner also
to be secure generally means that you
also have a strong social support
network outside of your primary
relationship so while there are going to
be slight differences of course in terms
of levels of sociability it generally
just feels kind of weird for secure
people if they have this thriving active
social life and their partner does not
or they are the only person that their
partner ever confides in or goes to with
things it starts to feel imbalanced and
that imbalance feels uncomfortable and
can bleed into a sense of codependency
over time so finding someone who has a
strong social network outside of the
relationship tends to be a huge green
flag for securely attached people
seventh thing that securely attached
people tend to see is a green flag in
potential romantic Partners is that they
are reasonably emotionally available and
fairly consistent in their emotional
availability and both of those pieces
are important right if you're sometimes
super emotionally available and then
other times completely shut off off that
can actually be really disorienting
especially when you're looking at who
you want to spend your life
co-regulating with however of course
everybody goes through days that are a
bit more difficult or periods of their
life that are a bit more challenging but
as a general rule securely attach people
are looking for partners who are open
about what they're going through even
when what they're going through is
difficult who can name that and who
don't feel a sense of shame or the need
to kind of hide away when something is
wrong and someone who is fairly
consistent in their ability to express
their feelings because again when you're
looking for a long-term partner you're
choosing someone to co-regulate with
long term and it's very stressful for
the nervous system and for your general
emotional state if someone is super hot
and cold so well nobody is ever going to
be the exact same two days in a row
secure people tend to experience a less
extreme emotional range than let's say
those who err on the anxious side of
things and a higher degree of emotional
availability than those who let's say
err on the avoidance side of things and
again that openness that willingness to
be honest and sensitive and responsive
to one's partner as well as the ability
to remain relatively consistent over a
long period of time in terms of the way
that one shows up emotionally and in
Partnership is something that secure
people tend to naturally seek out in
their romantic Partners so while the
circumstances of Life are going to
change and your relationship is going to
change the way that you show up with
each other and the degree of honesty and
openness that you bring to the
relationship is likely to stay
relatively consistent over time thing
number eight the securely attached
people tend to look for in romantic
Partnerships is someone who either wants
the same type of future that they want
or who wants the future to unfold in the
same way that they do so the distinction
I want to make between those two things
is this some people have a very clear
very strong very specific view of what
they want for the future this can
include things like I want to have kids
in the next five years or I don't want
to have kids or I want to live in a city
or I want to live in the suburbs and
these things can be deal breakers for
people so those who have a very strong
and firm idea about the type of life and
the specifics of that type of life that
are non-negotiables to them are going to
be seeking out people who have those
same wants and needs however again there
are personality differences between
securely attached people so you might
have a secure person who has kind of a
hazier idea of the future maybe they're
just a little bit more go with the flow
as a person and they don't feel as
strongly about having everything mapped
out specifically in which case maybe
they're just looking for someone else
who wants to go with the flow and figure
things out as the years go by so this
isn't necessarily about wanting all the
exact same things for the future it's
about having the same orientation
towards the future if you've got the
specifics down you want to find someone
who wants those same specifics if you
prefer to let the specifics come as they
will then you're going to want to look
for someone else who has that same
attitude and who isn't trying to get you
to get specific well before you feel
ready to again this is one that I see
getting missed all of the time in secure
dynamics that what do you want for the
future conversation can be so
threatening that we can just Veer away
from it all together in an insecure
couple whereas insecure relationships
it's a very natural thing to want to
seek someone out who wants to work
towards the future in the same way thing
number nine that securely attached
people tend to look for in romantic
Partnerships is someone who can navigate
conflict well and specifically what I'm
going to call navigating conflict well
is the ability to take the appropriate
amount of responsibility for what's
going on so this means neither fawning
and taking 100 responsibility for
everything that goes wrong which often
leads to a sense of resentment down the
line or refusing to take any of the
blame and putting everything on the
other person and assuming that every
single problem is one-sided so secure
people tend to approach conflict with a
relatively open mind so they're aware
that they have their own side of the
story but so does the other person and
there's likely something in the middle
that's getting missed especially because
more often than not insecure Dynamics
conflict is actually about the thing
that it's about in insecure Dynamics you
have more stories at play right to have
an insecure relationship narrative means
to have some kind of distortions that
are constantly going on about the nature
of attachment relationships and about
how you and other people relate to each
other because secure people make minimal
distortions on the truth they're pretty
much always just trying to get to the
truth of things and that doesn't mean
that conflict is fun it doesn't mean
they want to have it however it's a lot
easier to sort through conflict
respectfully when you're just dealing
with the actual issue at hand and you're
not projecting all of these defensive
narratives and stories onto the
situation usually in both cases right so
secure people are looking for people who
don't shy away from conflict but who
also don't make it any worse than it has
to be they want to actually solve their
problems get to the root of things and
figure out a practical solution for most
problems and they're looking for
partners who are both able and willing
to do the same thing and number 10 this
is far from the last thing that secure
people factor in when they're looking
for a partnership but it is a really
important one is that they are looking
for a strong sense of mutual respect so
in insecure Dynamics I'm going to say
like 80 plus percent of the time if you
take both people and ask them who is
better in this relationship they're both
going to have an answer even if they
won't say it it's going to immediately
come to mind and it's going to be a
fairly strong feeling and I want to be
clear that you could enjoy being on
either side of this Dynamic right you
could like feeling like oh this person's
better than me I snagged someone who's
more attractive more intelligent more
solid and stable than me right or you
could like the feeling of oh because I
feel better than this other person I
don't really have to be vulnerable in
this connection I'm probably not ever
going to actually get hurt by it however
secure people are comfortable with
vulnerability and they're also
comfortable with responsibility so
they're looking for partners who are
approximately equal to them in all of
the ways that matter to them and what
matters to people and what they respect
in themselves and others is going to be
different person to person however with
secure people what you don't generally
see is relationships that are filled
with contempt or with limerence or
putting one person on a pedestal because
there is that underlying sense of
friendship companionship and a belief
that I'm okay and you're okay there
tends to be a true sense of equanimity
in Secure relationships both people know
what they're bringing to the table both
people think it's valuable what they're
bringing to the table and both people
truly respect their partner and value
what their partner brings to the table
and having a sense of mutual respect is
in my opinion potentially one of the
most important things when it comes to a
relationship persevering you need
compatibility you need shared interests
however you also really need to feel as
though your partner is just a good egg
that's there's a phrase that I find
myself coming back to a lot in my mind
you should be able to look at the person
you're dating marrying in love with and
go that's a good egg I got a good one
and so did they strong respect for self
strong respect for other That's the
basis of that I'm okay you're okay world
view all right that's all I have to say
for today on the topic of things that
secure people look for in romantic
Partnerships I could say a lot more than
this and I'm certain that I will over
the course of this channel but I just
wanted to point out some of the things
that I see as the biggest differences
between what people who are insecurely
attached unconsciously seek out in
Partnerships versus what securely
attached people consciously seek out so
if you are looking to move into a more
secure place yourself I encourage you to
just put some thought into all of the
above what type of future are you
looking for in what way do you want to
move towards it what level of emotional
closeness are you looking for what level
of intimacy on various levels are you
looking for and any of those things that
feel super important to you are you
willing to make them a deal breaker
because I can promise you from a lot of
experience you cannot walk into a
relationship that has a lot of these
things as incompatible abilities and
just hope that the other person is going
to change to start wanting what you want
that works out for very very few of us
insecure people know how to cut through
a lot of that potential Drama by just
basing their decisions off of a mix of
emotion and practicality right from the
get-go
all right that's all I have to say on
this topic for today as always let me
know in the comments section what you're
thinking feeling experiencing struggling
with as you move through the process of
attachment healing as always I love you
guys I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and I will see
you back here again super soon
[Music]