hey guys heidi prep here today i wanted
to talk about something that was brought
to my attention when i was looking at
the comments of an old video and it was
i can't remember if it was just the four
attachment styles or the four attachment
styles in relationship something like
that but someone commented are you ever
going to get to the fourth attachment
style and i was like that's funny and a
good point i usually label my videos the
four attachment styles and then i go on
to absolutely never talk about the
secure style so there is a reason for
this and the reason is that secures tend
to need less resources when it comes to
relationships than the other three
insecure styles but it's also really
important for us to be aware of what
attachment security is and what it looks
like because i think that a lot of us
get to this point in our healing journey
where we're kind of like okay i know
what not to do like i'm very hyper aware
of what i'm doing wrong but i don't
necessarily have a model for what i'm
supposed to be doing instead or for what
a healthy and healed attachment style or
healthy and healed attachment
relationship actually looks like so
today i wanted to go over a
non-comprehensive list of some of the
characteristics that you're likely to
see in a secure relationship so here we
go characteristic number one of securely
attached relationships is that the
people in the relationship know how to
fight fair so it's not that there's
never conflict in secure relationships
all relationships have conflict conflict
is actually a pretty healthy part of
learning to live alongside someone else
but in insecure relationships a lot of
the time conflict feels very unbearable
for one reason or another whereas in
secure relationships conflict is very
bearable it's not fun but it's bearable
and what i mean by that is that for the
most part both people are able to stay
relatively regulated through conflict so
even if emotions get really heightened
or things get kind of heated it doesn't
necessarily feel like okay my entire
life is going to go out the window if we
can't resolve this conflict which is
sometimes what it feels like in insecure
relationships especially when you have a
whole bunch of wounds or traumas popping
up for people through conflict so there
will be tension that crops up there will
be emotions that get heightened but both
people are able for the most part to
deal with the tense and uncomfortable
nature of conflict so there isn't
necessarily this urgency to sort out any
conflict that arises right away or to
push it completely under the rug right
insecure relationships for the most part
conflicts can wait both people can take
a little bit of time to cool down think
about what they want to say and then
return to the conflict at a time when
they're ready to work together on it and
kind of approach it as us against the
problem rather than us against each
other so for both people a little bit of
tension a little bit of awkwardness a
little bit of space before the conflict
is properly resolved is bearable it
doesn't feel like those things have to
be done away with right away
and in the same vein a little bit of
discomfort while the problem is being
worked through
also feels bearable it doesn't feel like
disagreeing on some things or saying
something that might be a little bit
awkward and vulnerable to say are going
to be the end of the world and those
things often have to be said in order
for both parties to understand where
each other's coming from and arrive at a
middle ground so it's not that secure
people never have conflict it's that
they find the feelings associated with
conflict bearable therefore it's easier
to deal with the conflict in a healthy
way characteristic number two of a
secure relationship is that
co-regulation leads to more independence
at the end of the day rather than less
so what does this mean when you have an
insecure relationship a lot of the time
what we think of as co-regulation is
actually just two people being in the
drama triangle and one of them stepping
in to savior the other so you often have
one or more people in an insecurely
attached relationship looking at the
other person like they are the answer to
all of their problems but in a healthy
secure relationship both people know i
am not the answer to the other person's
problems i'm just the person who can
support them while they go find the
answers to their own problems so instead
of stepping into that savior or rescuer
position in the drama triangle when
their partner comes to them with a
problem they each step naturally into
the coach position and they help each
other work through their own independent
issues in a way that does not create
codependency you get this really nice
situation where two people are
empowering each other to live their
independent lives in a better way rather
than feeling like they have to retreat
to each other because they're incapable
of solving their own problems so
co-regulation in a secure relationship
can look like a lot of things but one of
the things that it often looks like is
kind of like a pep talk so it's not
saying come in closer because you need
me it's saying come in closer so i can
remind you of all the ways that you
don't and that you are okay and capable
and fully able to tackle life i will
just be here in the background rooting
for you characteristic number three of
secure relationships is that you often
see a strong sense of mutual trust in a
way that you often don't see this in
insecure relationships and the reason
that you get that sense of trust so
naturally is twofold one is because
insecure relationships for the most part
people know where they stand with each
other so in insecure relationships it
often feels like oh my god is this fight
gonna be the thing that ends us are we
gonna break up in two days or at the end
of this week if even one little thing
goes wrong but in securely attached
relationships both partners are more or
less able to offer the other a sense of
emotional safety so they both know save
for something extreme happening i'm not
going anywhere you're not going anywhere
and so we can be comfortable being
interdependent both people can be fairly
calm in their feeling that they're a
priority to the other one but the second
reason why trust might feel more natural
in a secure relationship is because both
people know that they are okay without
the other so there's a quote i really
like that i'm going to read here that
goes a bird sitting on a tree is never
afraid of the branch breaking because
its trust is not on the branch but in
its own wings
and i think that that's a really good
example of what it's like to be securely
attached you know that of course the
worst thing could always happen your
partner could always betray you in a
massive way but even if they did you
have a full life of other people of
other support systems that you could
turn to and you also have a strong sense
of independence so you know that even if
the worst thing happened you might be
heartbroken you might be really sad if
things ended with your partner or if
your trust was betrayed in a major way
but you would also get through it
right because you know that you have the
capacity to do that so in a secure
relationship there is an interdependent
element to that trust both people have
to be able to give each other
reassurance and validation that they
matter to each other but there's also
that sense of i will be okay no matter
what characteristic number four of
securely attached relationships is that
emotions are both expressed directly and
taken seriously when they're brought up
and i need to give credit where credit
is due here which is to say that in
insecure relationships it's often not
the best policy to take every emotion at
face value because not every emotion
that's presented at face value is
actually about the situation at hand so
when you have attachment wounding it's
very common for things like conflict to
bring up emotional flashbacks from your
early childhood or from past traumas or
whatever it is which means that a fight
between two insecurely attached people
might on the surface be a fight about
let's say one person not doing the
dishes but when you look at both
people's perspectives the first person
has made that argument about the dishes
to mean you didn't do the dishes because
you don't love me just like my family
never loved me and nobody respects me
and nobody listens to anything i say
so that's a very loaded argument from
their point of view they're not trying
to prove that their partner should do
the dishes they're trying to prove that
they are worth loving and respecting and
valuing and that's a huge huge
expectation to put on an argument right
and then on the other side of things the
argument about you should do the dishes
to the other person might feel like i'm
being controlled the way i've always
been controlled i've never had autonomy
over my own life or my own choices you
can't control me so they might be on the
surface fighting about the fact that
they're tired and don't feel like doing
the dishes tonight but under the surface
they're trying to prove that they can't
be controlled and that their life is
their own and so now you have this fight
that is incredibly weighted right
because it's not just about the thing
that it's about on the surface but in a
secure relationship the fights for the
most part are just about the things on
the surface so they're a lot easier to
resolve right it's not that hard to
reach a resolution about when to do the
dishes and whose responsibility it is to
do them when but it is pretty hard for
both partners to resolve a lifetime of
trauma and attachment wounding through a
single argument so you might find that
in insecure relationships people aren't
taking each other's emotions seriously
because the emotions being presented are
very out of proportion like someone is
really mad about the dishes in a
situation where it doesn't necessarily
make sense to be that mad but because
the fights are a little bit more present
rational and focused insecure
relationships it's not as difficult for
the two partners to sit down hear each
other out
value what each other is thinking and
feeling take that into consideration and
then find a solution together because
again both people more or less
understand the balance between
self-regulation and co-regulation so
there's more of a natural understanding
of what is mine to sort through on my
own and when is it appropriate to bring
something up to my partner and expect
them to reciprocate and want to work
with that on me and even that can be a
process that gets negotiated over the
course of a relationship right and on
the other side of things it's also taken
as a given that emotions are a normal
part of life everyone has them there's
no shame in having them and we can talk
about these things with each other
because we're both humans having a human
experience and a very big part of that
experience is emotional characteristic
number five of a secure relationship is
that each person is comfortable and
capable of taking a turn at being the
other person's secure base so what that
means is that nobody is perfect no human
is perfectly regulated even securely
attached people so every once in a while
one person in a partnership is going to
be a little bit irrational they're going
to be a little bit upset about something
that maybe doesn't make that much sense
they're going to come home from work one
day super flustered and needing a little
bit more comfort than usual and each
person in a secure partnership is going
to be able to handle to a reasonable
extent their partner's dysregulation and
what our partners need when they have
these bad days or these tough periods of
their lives is going to be dependent on
what kind of person they are so some
people need a little bit of extra space
while they're moving through difficult
periods of their lives or when they're
having a bad day and a secure regulated
partner is perfectly able to give their
partner a little bit of extra space when
that's what they need and on the flip
side other people might want a little
bit of extra company or attention or to
spend some quality time together and
make some jokes when they're having a
hard day and a secure regulated partner
is going to be able to shift some things
around within reason to make that happen
because again both people's emotional
experiences matter to the other and
they're able to meet each other's needs
not based on what they would do but
based on what their partner needs in
that moment and the important thing here
is that both partners are able to do it
and that they can take turns doing this
a secure relationship doesn't mean you
don't need anything from each other it
just means that there's a fairly even
balance of giving and taking and also
that that giving and taking is flexible
so it's not one person can give but only
in this specific way right it's both
people adapt to each other's needs
within reason and the sixth
characteristic of a secure relationship
that we're going to talk about today is
probably the most important one and it
is that there are realistic expectations
placed on the relationship when we are
insecurely attached by virtue of our
insecure attachment we tend to have
unrealistic expectations of a
relationship so an anxiously attached
person might feel like a relationship is
going to take away all of my anxiety and
insecurity and if it's not doing that it
must be the wrong relationship or i must
find a way for my partner to take away
all of this pain and on the flip side of
things an avoidantly attached person
might feel like my partner has to be
perfectly reasonable all of the time or
else they are not the right partner for
me my ideal partner would never get
dysregulated even for a minute and both
of these are unrealistic expectations to
place on a relationship right
relationships require self-regulation
and co-regulation and any imbalance of
the two so going too hard in one
direction or the other is gonna make for
a difficult to maintain relationship so
i was at a 12-step meeting the other day
and someone said something that i really
liked which is i have to keep reminding
myself that i can't buy milk at a
hardware store and i think that that is
a perfect example of what we're doing
when we go into a relationship with the
wrong expectations so if we expect a
relationship to give us endless
happiness fulfillment and self-esteem we
are wandering around a hardware store
looking for milk and we are going to be
chronically disappointed because there
is just not milk anywhere in that store
okay so securely attached people have a
more or less natural understanding of
what a relationship is and what it is
not so which needs it can and can't
fulfill for them so a relationship is
not the answer to all of their problems
and they know that and they don't expect
it to be so what you'll often see with
insecure relationships that you don't
see with secure relationships is the
relationship itself cracking under the
incredible weight of expectations that
are not necessarily reasonable or even
possible in some cases okay that is all
i have to say for today on secure
relationships but i want to spend a lot
more time talking about them and talking
about how to recognize signs of security
within yourself within your
relationships as we do attachment work
because knowing what not to do only gets
us half of the way and then knowing what
to do and what behavior to model our own
after gets us the rest of the way to
secure so keep coming back we're going
to talk about security insecurity and
absolutely everything in between over
the next
year or two on this channel in the
meantime i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and i will see
you back here again soon
[Music]
you