hey guys heidi preed here i am calling
this video an attachment vocabulary
video but this is not official
attachment vocabulary like they don't
talk about this in attachment literature
it's just a concept that i have been
kind of mulling over in relation to how
it applies to attachment so a couple of
weeks ago i was reading a fiction book
and the main character in this book was
talking about how as a child her
adoptive father would take her out into
the wilderness and teach her how to kind
of be tough and survive and one of the
things he told her was there's a
difference between toughness and
strength and what you need to be trying
to cultivate in life is strength but
toughness is often kind of what we
cultivate in moments where we are weak
but need to appear strong and i think
that this is actually very relevant to
attachment because i have noticed
through attachment groups that i
frequent through reading the comments on
my own videos through talking about
attachment styles to different people
that there is this bias to thinking of
avoidant attachment as the strongest
attachment style emotionally because
they never seem to show distress because
they never talk about or reach out for
help with their problems people assume
that avoidance are the strongest style
however that is completely inaccurate
the strongest style emotionally is hands
down no questions asked securely
attached people but the avoidant is
absolutely the toughest style and what
that means is that they are able to
endure
quite a bit of pain without breaking but
they don't necessarily have the skills
to integrate that pain into their
awareness and make better choices
because they acknowledge it so in this
video i want to talk a little bit about
the difference between toughness and
strength and why it's strength that we
really need to be trying to cultivate
when we start working on healing our
attachment style instead of trying to be
tough and just withstand emotional pain
without ever fully letting it in so i
wrote down kind of five differences that
i've been thinking about that
differentiate toughness from strength
and how we can apply those things to
attachment healing so the first
difference is that toughness is about
enduring but strength is about resolving
so when we have someone who has let's
say an avoidant attachment style or
someone who is choosing an avoidant
response often what they're doing is
unconsciously denying that they're
having an emotional experience
whatsoever so you might have an avoidant
person moving through a breakup a death
of someone they loved something really
emotionally difficult and they just
don't feel what they think they should
be feeling about that thing and this is
not their fault it's often not what they
have chosen but it's this kind of
hardwired toughness to their psyche the
body and the brain doesn't let the
painful feelings leave the body and
travel into the realm of conscious
awareness so you will often have
avoidantly attached people who have
really unresolved pains in their life
they might have someone they love who's
died a really long time ago and they've
never really felt anything about it but
they might still be getting triggers
around it that they don't realize are
related or they might be getting ill or
they might be getting unwell in other
ways whether that's through their mental
or physical health because they have not
resolved the pain and the grief of early
experiences that their body has never
really allowed them to feel
now when you are strong emotionally it
means that you move through the
appropriate emotions at the appropriate
time and obviously it's going to be a
little bit different for everyone
there's not a linear nature to things
like grief and bereavement and pain but
because those feelings are processed and
integrated they don't kind of surprise
attack you later they don't turn into
illnesses in the body or mind having a
securely attached mindset means you're
able to resolve the pain and the grief
and the challenging experiences that you
go through and find some sort of meaning
in them find a way to make them make
sense for you even though they hurt and
you feel that hurt and so you are
actually able in both your body and your
mind to move on from them and leave the
past in the past and be present in the
present moment that is strength but
enduring through tough situations and
not feeling anything about it is not
strength it's toughness it's that denial
of need that denial of emotion and again
this is not consciously chosen by
avoidant spectrum types this is often
something that they kind of wish they
could access like a lot of avoidantly
attached people especially once they
start becoming aware of attachment
styles might really wish that they could
process the emotions associated with
certain things that have happened to
them but they need to re-learn to do
that usually in a safe therapeutic
environment because they're really
really tough and they're able to get
through those tough moments but they're
not able to integrate the full impact
and meaning of those experiences in a
way that allows them to develop true
emotional strength so number two
difference between toughness and
strength is that toughness disconnects
us from our needs whereas strength
accounts for and infuses our lives with
solutions to our needs so when you are
dealing with something from an avoidant
place often there's this natural
discounting of how you feel of how other
people feel it's kind of all hard logic
all the time it's that attitude of like
facts don't care about your feelings
right but in reality
facts have to account for feelings like
when you study economics for example you
study not what the most logical outcomes
of certain buying behaviors are you
study the irrationality behind people's
buying behavior so if you just take
emotion out of the equation when you're
trying to figure something out it gets
really hard to predict what's going to
happen because emotion colors so much of
how people show up in the world and what
happens in the world and so if you are
saying i don't care about feelings i'm
not going to look at it you're actually
going to end up making a lot of faulty
predictions because people don't behave
logically right and you have to account
for that actually i have trouble saying
that i think there's a rationality
behind absolutely everything that
everyone does all of the time and if you
feel like someone is doing something
really irrational it just means you do
not yet understand them deeply enough
and people will always be like no i do
understand them and that's why i know
they're being irrational nope if you
think that they are behaving
irrationally you do not understand
deeply enough 100 of the time this is
not to say that people are always doing
the right thing if we're looking at it
from a moral lens it also means people
are not always making the most informed
choice right so there can be problems
but everything people do i believe makes
sense to them given the very specific
context they're in given their entire
past history given everything going on
around them at the moment given their
biology their physiology there is a
rationality behind everything but if you
are trying to say feelings are
irrational so i'm not going to pay
attention to them you are missing vital
pieces of information that need to be
considered in order to make holistic and
sound decisions so that was a bit of a
rant but all of that is to say that
toughness is denying you have needs
which again will later on come back to
bite you whereas when you are strong
you're able to acknowledge i have needs
i have emotional and practical needs and
i have to look at what solutions i can
find that are able to sustain both sides
of that spectrum right so i have to find
solutions to the problems in my life
that do not drain and deplete me
emotionally but that also do not drain
and deplete my resources so strength is
not a matter of white knuckling through
something and figuring out how to go
without what you really want or need
it's about acknowledging all of your
needs and figuring out what the best
solution is even if it might not make
the most sense if you were to cut
yourself off from needs because secure
people know you can't really do that and
not have major consequences right you
can't deny that you have feelings you
can't deny that you have certain needs
and still live a whole happy life when
you are cutting yourself off from any
part of yourself you are naturally
weakening yourself because it's like
you're intentionally creating a blind
spot and a weak spot for yourself and
why would you do that but toughness and
just enduring things without finding
long-term sustainable solutions to them
actually makes us weaker in the long
term because there are things that we
want there are things that we need that
we are not getting and that makes us a
lot easier to manipulate it makes us a
lot more reactive in certain areas it
allows us to not really be in full
control right denying our needs can be a
short-term solution in a lot of
situations but when it's a long-term
solution it actually slowly robs us of
our strength and autonomy which leads me
to my next distinction toughness
involves both temporary and long-term
repression whereas strength involves
short-term suppression and long-term
integration so there are going to be
times in life where absolutely we have
to put our feelings and our needs aside
to get something done that is
unavoidable for anyone but when we have
let's say a secure attachment style or
when we are operating from a secure
place we're able to consciously go okay
i have this need or this want that is
really important to me but for now i'm
gonna have to put it to the side in
pursuit of a greater goal but i know
that it's there and in the long term i'm
going to find a way to come back and
integrate that thing into my life so for
example let's say you really want to own
a home but you know that for the time
being it doesn't make financial sense
for you to own a home so you're just
going to rent for a little while until
you earn the money to be able to invest
and then you're going to make that
conscious choice to reintegrate that
need for stability and security and
safety in the form of a permanent place
to live and so even in the period where
you're kind of suppressing all of those
needs you know that those needs are
there and you know that you're going to
find a longer-term way to get them met
now repression is different than
suppression suppression is when we have
something in our conscious awareness for
a while we choose not to attend to it
and then when it makes sense we'll bring
it back in but with repression it's
about our wants and needs actually being
buried in our unconscious mind in such a
way that we probably can't even access
them so what this might look like using
the same example is someone who has a
need for stability and security but it's
so repressed that they don't know it's
there so they go from kind of living
situation to living situation maybe
they're hopping all over the place and
they might feel off they might feel kind
of vaguely empty and unhappy but not
know why because their need is repressed
they don't understand that they actually
want that stability that they're craving
a sense of groundedness and that
experience of being kind of disconnected
from your needs and disconnected from
knowing what you want and what's
important to you in life is pretty
typical of people who are on the
avoidant attachment spectrum they might
be really good at figuring out what's
logical but not really good at figuring
out what they actually want and what's
really important to them in life
strength is understanding that you can't
have everything you want at the exact
time you want it but when you're making
any given choice you're aware of which
needs aren't being met and you're
forming strategies as you go for how to
get those needs met in the future next
distinction toughness is about looking
capable strength is about being capable
and this is a big one i think that a lot
of the time we have people who want to
be seen as very strong they want to be
seen as very capable and they think that
what that means is not needing anyone
for anything and to be able to
completely take care of themselves to
not ever need help but what that
actually makes for is a person who is
lacking perspective who is lacking
resources that you can only really get
through collaborating with other people
who is lacking feedback and correction
that they could get were they to open
themselves up to other people's thoughts
and opinions and again in the long run
that might make you appear strong but it
does not make you strong because a key
part of strength is knowing what you
don't know knowing what you're not
capable of and then finding ways to be
interdependent and to cooperatively
source what you need from other people
so that might mean looking for people
you can collaborate with who can even
out the skill sets that you're not as
good at it can mean admitting openly
when you don't know something and then
allowing yourself to learn it can mean
approaching new situations with humility
because you're not embarrassed to admit
that there's a lot you don't know that
you are constantly learning new things
and that you are also a perfectly normal
human being who has a full emotional
range which means that sometimes you
have an off day sometimes you need
someone else's help sometimes you need
to lean on the people in your life and
all of those things are the building
blocks of becoming incredibly capable
right and that actually leads me to the
last distinction which is that toughness
hinges upon isolation whereas strength
hinges upon interdependence so when you
are tough and all of your vulnerability
is suppressed and you can't access it
the only way to really keep existing
that way is in isolation because to form
healthy relationships with people to be
interdependent to have a life that
involves a lot of give and take we need
to be aware of our feelings our needs
and our vulnerabilities and we also need
to be able to communicate those in safe
situations so tough people can only
really be tough by being in isolation
but strong people kind of have their
bases covered from a 360 degree angle
right they know where their blind spots
are they know where their weaknesses are
and they have set up their environment
in such a way that they have places and
people to fall back on in those areas
where they're weak right and ultimately
that allows for a much stronger person
overall because they have an entire
ecosystem set up around them that helps
them to meet all of their needs so the
way i kind of look at it is that
toughness is a very kind of activated
experience like you always have to be
kind of on and ready to defend yourself
because you don't know how to deeply
care for yourself if things go wrong but
strength is a very calm experience
because you know that your needs exist
in a more diffused way like you have
lots of people who can help you with
lots of different things so even if you
kind of get struck in one area of your
life you know that there are many other
areas you can turn to you have lots of
support you have lots of systems set up
that keep you functioning healthily but
you also have lots of people who can
help you when things go wrong so you
don't have to be kind of chronically on
guard right you can relax you can take
more chances you can be more flexible in
your approach to things because you are
not existing in this kind of solitary
way where you are responsible for
meeting all of your own needs so you can
never really have other people helping
you and this is really hard and this is
not to say that having an avoidant
attachment style is a moral failing it
is not chosen the attachment styles that
we form we do not choose right and none
of us are playing out our insecure
attachment patterns on purpose but it is
such a misconception that not showing
any emotional vulnerability makes one
strong that actually makes one the most
vulnerable to really major upsets
happening because they have never
learned the skills that they require to
integrate emotional upsets and make
better decisions based on that
integration the emotionally strong
person feels things processes those
things and then makes better more
informed decisions based on having done
all of that processing so when we are
doing attachment healing of any sort
it's important to remember that we do
not have to swing the pendulum all the
way in the other direction if you are
anxiously attached your goal should not
be to become avoidant and to be
completely stoic and to never feel or
show any emotion the goal is to get to
that middle ground where you're able to
integrate both emotion and reason and
find a way to live interdependently so
that your bases are covered and so that
you can be again truly interdependent
not codependent or counter-dependent all
right i think that's all i have to say
for today thank you for sitting with me
through my musings on that topic i love
you guys i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other let me know
your thoughts on this video in the
comments and i will see you all back
here again very soon
[Music]