hey guys heidi preeb here i wanted to
hop on today and do what i'm gonna try
to keep as a quick video i feel like i
say that at the beginning of every video
about a term that i hear getting misused
all of the time in and around attachment
communities so i'm in a number of
facebook groups that talk about
attachment and this one term i often see
people misusing and mixing up with
another term that i don't think they're
aware is what they're actually talking
about so this term is boundaries now
it is so normal i think to actually not
have a lot of awareness around
boundaries so not necessarily knowing
what a boundary is how to set one how to
keep one what qualifies as a boundary
and what doesn't and so today i just
wanted to make some clarifications
between what is a boundary and what is
an expectation because i see these two
terms being used almost interchangeably
in a lot of attachment groups and i
think that that is causing a lot of
confusion and also frustration for
people because if we're calling
something a boundary but it's not a
boundary it's gonna be really hard for
us to understand like why is this
boundary not being up kept right so
there's a really quick clarifier that we
can look at for whether something is a
boundary or an expectation that we're
putting on someone else a boundary is
always within your control a hundred
percent of the time it's about what
actions you will take regardless of what
anyone else does in expectation is
something that you expect or that you
want someone else to do and it's not
that we should never have expectations
healthy relationships are built on
expectations right especially ones that
are explicitly defined and agreed upon
but what i see a lot of the time is
people placing expectations on their
partner and calling it a boundary so
saying something like my boundary is
that my partner has to call me back
every single time i call them within an
hour right and that
feels like a boundary because it's
something that you want out of the
relationship and something that's
important to you maybe but what it
actually is is an expectation that
you're putting on someone else's
behavior now you can have expectations
again those are not bad things but
when we're setting expectations calling
them boundaries and acting like there's
something that we have total control
over we're often missing a really
crucial part of expectation setting
which is getting the other person's
agreement so a relationship doesn't
really work if one person is setting all
the expectations and the other person a
isn't aware of them or b isn't agreeing
to them so to make an expectation work
you have to have both parties explicitly
agreeing that they will take certain
actions to make each other happy or to
reduce conflict or for whatever the end
result that you want is
with a boundary it's about what you will
do if your boundary involves a way that
someone else has to behave that's not a
boundary it's an expectation a boundary
is something like if you are speaking to
me in a certain tone of voice or if
you're speaking unkindly to me i will
disengage from the conversation a
boundary is about what you will do right
so it can have a kind of cause and
effect quality to it like you can say
okay if someone else takes this action
then this is what i will do to protect
myself but it's all about what you will
do in order to enforce a boundary it has
to be within your control so it has to
be centered around a behavior that you
can take no matter what anyone else does
so setting an expectation but calling it
a boundary is kind of like constructing
a fence on your neighbor's property line
right so you might want to keep your
home safe and you might want to have
those barriers up to make sure that
everything you own is protected but
if you don't build the fence on your
property line your neighbor can legally
tear down that fence at any point in
time and so it's not really keeping you
that safe or protecting you because you
don't have control over whether it's up
or down right now if you build a fence
on your property line you're a lot safer
because you have control over whether or
not that fence stays up and this is the
difference between a boundary and an
expectation a boundary is a decision you
make about your own behavior that you
build on your side of the fence that you
have complete power to enforce and
follow through on an expectation is like
making an agreement with your neighbor
that they will build a fence on their
side of the property it's great if they
respect it but at the end of the day you
legally do not have the right to what
they do and what they choose to put up
or down on their own property so if you
want to be protected you better be
building that fence on your side of the
property line okay so i'm going to go
over a few examples of kind of common
themes that i see coming up again and
again and again in these attachment
groups when people are talking about
boundaries and i didn't take any real
examples i kind of extrapolated from
like some of the themes but i wanted to
give some concrete examples of what's a
boundary and what's an expectation
because i see these terms just being so
frequently misused so here's one that
i've seen kind of a couple times listed
as a boundary in certain facebook groups
that i'm a part of i have a boundary
that i won't answer my phone if my
partner is calling while i'm at work
that one is a hundred percent a boundary
right they're not saying my boundaries
that my partner can't call me at work no
one has control over whether or not
their partner is going to call them but
they have control over not picking up
their phone so the boundaries around the
action that they will take i will not
answer my phone at work that's within
their control the fence is on their side
of the property line there the next one
and this is one i actually have seen
explicitly in several different places
or some variation of this my boundary is
that my partner has to call me each
night before bed so this is not a
boundary this is an expectation because
you don't have control over whether or
not your partner is going to call you
right and again you can have
expectations just make sure that they're
explicitly agreed upon so you want to be
sitting down with your partner and going
it's really important to me that you
call me every night before bed or that
we speak on the phone every night before
we go to sleep is that something that
you're comfortable with and that you're
happy to meet because where we get into
murky territory is when our partners do
not agree upon the expectations but
we're holding them to them anyways right
that's not fair to either party and it
also doesn't really work because then
you're expecting something that you have
no capacity to know whether or not it's
going to get delivered on and that's
kind of setting yourself up for a lot of
frustration and angst the next one so i
have a boundary that my partner can't
insult me so this is an expectation this
is not a boundary because again you
don't have control over how your partner
is speaking to you right but is this a
fair expectation absolutely right so i
would argue that this one though it is
not a boundary it should have a boundary
around it so this one's kind of halfway
there right it's recognizing there is
unhealthy behavior that's not going to
push our relationship forward and that i
need to kind of build a fence around to
keep myself safe from so what a boundary
around this would look like is if you
insult me i'm going to hang up the phone
i'm going to walk out of the room i'm
going to discontinue the conversation so
there needs to be some sort of action
that you will take in order to protect
yourself in this situation right however
once again it's also fine to tell your
partner i have an expectation that we
will speak kindly and respectfully to
each other even when we're upset and so
if you're insulting or rude towards me
i'm going to enact my boundary and i'm
going to take space right so you're
setting up both the expectation and the
boundary and if they don't agree to that
expectation and they're like no i really
want to be able to insult you that's
when you are lucky that you have your
boundary in place right okay so this is
one that's not from a facebook group
this is my own personal boundary that i
hold with everyone in my life to make
overall communication with people easier
on myself
and it's that i will always respond to
people at face value so if someone is
being passive-aggressive or non-direct
with me i will and i let people know
this at the beginning of having any sort
of relationship with me i will always
respond to them as if the thing that
they are saying is the true thing that
they're saying so i will not
deliberately go into subtext and try to
like decode any messages or anything
that they say to me that they want to
convey one thing when they're really
saying another thing i try to let people
know from the get-go i will respond to
everything you say at face value to make
communication easier on both of us but
here's a promise that i can give to you
in return and it's that if you have a
problem with me or if something i'm
doing is hurting you or upsetting you
and you bring it up to me directly i
will 100 take that at face value as well
and we'll put that on the table and i
will care about your emotional
experience and we'll work through it and
so a lot of the time when you're setting
boundaries kind of like when you're
setting an expectation there can be a
very soft side to it right where you're
kind of explaining this is the fence i
need to have up to keep myself safe but
here's where there's a side door if you
need it that i'm happy for you to walk
through right so if you're upset with me
if something i'm doing is making you
uncomfortable you can tell me you can
come to me i will care i just won't
respond to you in a way that in my eyes
is going to make the problem worse long
long-term rather than better and i think
that that's a really good thing to think
about when we're setting boundaries is
why would someone resort to this
behavior right and is there another
option we can give them that would just
go smoother for everyone so now it's in
their awareness so for example the
person who wouldn't answer their phone
at work right maybe they'll respond to a
text on their lunch break at work or
maybe they'll make a deal with their
partner that as soon as i get off work i
will shoot you a quick text back or give
you a quick call depending on what works
for both of their schedules so that
you're not blocking off connection right
you're just providing a healthier kind
of contained route for achieving it last
boundary this is not taken from a
facebook group but i think it's one that
a lot of couples have and it's we can't
sleep with other people right so that
again is not a boundary it's an
expectation but it's kind of halfway
there so you're saying here's the action
i will take that i would like you to
match and in monogamous relationships
this is a very common expectation but
again it's an expectation right it's
asking your partner to do something to
keep you emotionally safe and you're
making the same promise in return to
them but having a boundary around this
would look like if you sleep with
someone else without discussing it with
me first or whatever the caveats might
be in your relationship i will leave the
relationship so you can have a boundary
that keeps yourself safe in the event
that someone breaks the expectation
right and healthy relationships in my
opinion have all three of these things
so expectations that are explicitly
agreed upon boundaries that keep you
emotionally safe no matter what someone
else does and also alternate avenues for
connection so that's that kind of side
door right like even in this case you
could tell your partner you know
monogamy is important to me but
if there's ever a time where you really
want to sleep with someone else talk to
me about it bring it to me let's see
what we can figure out to get all of our
needs met and maybe that just means
having a conversation about sexual needs
that are going unfulfilled in the
relationship maybe it's a conversation
about opening the relationship up right
but you can offer that opportunity for
them to come to you and know that it's
not a taboo topic and that's probably
going to be more comfortable for both of
you because you know that these
expectations have a little bit of wiggle
room if one person gets really
uncomfortable within the expectation and
sometimes that also just looks like
saying hey if this expectation if this
agreement that we make in any capacity
regardless of what the agreement is
stops working for one or both of us
let's make another agreement that we'll
be open to talking about it putting it
back on the table and seeing what we can
do to make something else work and a lot
of the time that's all it takes to take
an immense amount of pressure off the
expectations in our relationships right
i actually don't know after laying out
that whole metaphor whether like the
fence with a door in it makes sense i
guess it makes sense if it's like you
can open or close the door like someone
can't just walk through your boundary
but you can tell them like hey you can
come knock on this door and i'll open it
yeah that's what it is anyways i hope
that metaphor translated if you guys
have any questions let me know in the
comments and i'm also gonna link another
video i have called the four attachment
styles setting boundaries because
in that video we talk a lot about why
certain types might have trouble setting
boundaries even if they know what they
are and how to set them right and that
is a lot of us like it's really not
uncommon to struggle with boundary
setting especially if you're insecurely
attached if you are insecurely attached
and you're really good at boundaries
that's very impressive it's unusual the
avoidance do often think they're good at
setting boundaries but what they're
actually doing is ignoring people which
is a very different thing but we go over
all of that in the four attachment
styles setting boundaries video which
again i'll link below and until next
time i love you guys i hope you are
taking care of yourselves and each other
and i will see you back here again soon
[Music]
you