hey guys heidi preeb here so on my
channel we talk about all things
attachment style personality types and
any other systems or theories that help
us understand ourselves and other people
better so this week we're talking about
the early experiences of the different
attachment styles that led them to
developing the world view that they now
hold as adults so our attachment styles
are more or less formed before the age
of two or three and the reason that they
form this young is because as children
we are developing a world view and our
brain is wiring itself around that world
view that to an extent follows us
through our lives so our attachment
systems do grow and mature with us and
they might take on different expressions
or different forms as we go through life
based on what works for us as we grow up
but for the most part unless we
consciously intervene with our
attachment systems the styles that we
form when we're very young tend to
correspond to the styles that we have as
adults so today we're going to be
talking about the early experiences of
the securely attached person now i think
that secure attachment is the most
misunderstood attachment style because
people have this view of it in their
minds as kind of this perfect ideal and
often i also see people kind of freaking
out because they're like you have to be
the perfect parent in order to give your
child a secure style
actually that's not true at all
interestingly that kind of idea that you
have to be perfect and do everything the
right way and follow every rule
perfectly is generally more of an
avoidant attachment-style response than
a secure one
part of secure attachment means being
self-aware about when we need help about
what things we can't do well and being
able to cover our own blind spots and
also acknowledge when we've done
something wrong and model for our
children the ability to not get
everything right in life but to still
manage our relationships in the face of
that so secure parenting is less about
doing every little thing right and it's
more about being emotionally in tune
with your child and being able to repair
the relationship with them if a rupture
happens so secure parents are ironically
the ones who you'll probably most often
find saying things to their children
like i'm sorry i didn't handle that
properly let's talk about our feelings
around it together it's not about doing
everything right it's about being
attuned to your child's emotional
response and working together with your
child the way you would work with any
relationship in order to find a middle
ground where you're both happy and
respectful of each other there's a very
deep humility to secure attachment
because when you have a secure
attachment style as an adult you don't
necessarily have a large amount of
shame-bound emotions so what that means
is if you mess up you know how to
recognize your mess-ups and apologize
and make amends for them and so you end
up modeling that skill to your child and
as a result your child tends to feel
comfortable coming to you when they've
made a mistake or done something wrong
and they need someone to help them
figure out a better way forward so all
of that is a little bit of a caveat what
i want to talk about specifically is
what the early experiences of secure
attachment felt like for adults who now
have secure attachment as their style
now in this video we are specifically
talking about adults who have always had
a secure style so many adults go through
a long therapeutic process or through a
long journey of self-work where they
earn or develop a secure attachment
style often with the help of a therapist
who can model healthy relationship
skills with them but this video focuses
on people who have always had a secure
attachment style and who developed it
from a very young age and it's very
important to understand what went right
in these situations that allowed the
child to start developing in a way that
was both very resilient and very
flexible which are two of the traits
that characterize securely attached
children so the type of parenting that
develops a securely attached infant is
called sensitive parenting so generally
what happens when you have a securely
attached child is that the parent has a
very clear sense of differentiation
between the self and the child which
means they are not threatened in any way
by their child's emotional range and
this is quite different than the
experience of let's say a parent with an
anxious attachment style or a parent
with an avoidant attachment style so
with insecurely attached parents you
often get either an over or an under
identification with the child they might
either feel like the child's moods
particularly the child's negative
emotions like anger like an inability to
be soothed are a direct reflection of
who they are as a person and so they
have to reject the child if the child
becomes too distressed in some way in
order to prove i'm not a bad parent it's
just that the child is a bad child right
there's an over identification with the
child and they might believe the way
that the child is acting is a reflection
of who i am as a parent or it might be
the opposite they might feel like as
long as i feed my child as long as i
make sure they have a roof over their
head and food in their belly that is
where my responsibilities kind of end so
if the child's still upset after that
point i'll just let them cry it out
because i know that there's nothing
actually wrong so i'm just gonna let
this child learn to take care of their
own emotions they don't see things like
warmth and engagement and sensitivity as
a need for the child which it absolutely
is those things are crucial to the
child's development but again in the
case of insecure attachment the parent
is often looking at the child as a
reflection of who they are so if they
think i have to suck up all my emotions
or else i get picked on they're going to
try to instill that same mindset in
their child but with the sensitive
secure parent what you get is the
ability to handle and contain their
child's full range of emotions so when
the child is angry the parent does not
take it personally and they can sit with
that child's anger and actually help
their child kind of learn the lay of
that landscape help the child understand
why they're angry help them understand
what a better solution might be but that
doesn't mean dismissing their anger it
means really being present with that
emotion and then helping them figure out
what it means and doing the same thing
for sadness for happiness for distress
for fear right all of these emotions
that come up for children when they're
young the child does not naturally have
a blueprint for dealing with so when
they're angry they don't know what
they're supposed to do they go to their
caregiver and express the feeling and
they learn through their caregivers
response what they're supposed to do
with that emotion when they're sad the
child's first instinct is to go to their
parents see how their parent responds to
their emotion and then learn their
reaction around it and a parent who can
do this well and who can be present and
mirror their child's emotions back to
them without becoming overwhelmed
themselves by their child's experience
this is what we call containment the
parent is able to kind of take in the
child's emotion show the child that they
understand and that they see what
they're dealing with mirror it back to
them in some way and then help the child
find a healthy set of coping skills for
dealing with that emotion containment is
the act of holding our children's
experiences inside of our own minds in a
way that they are not yet able to and
processing them through an adult lens so
that we can teach our children the
appropriate responses kids don't have
the skills yet and sometimes as adults
we don't have the skills yet either so
we have to be very aware before we have
children or once we have them if an
emotion that our child expresses feels
very threatening to us or we feel
disgusted by it the best thing we can do
for that child is figure out why we are
blocked from experiencing that emotion
in its pure form and work with someone
else like a therapist who can contain
that emotion for us and help us move
through it in a healthier way so that we
can eventually model that skill for our
children and eventually the parents
ability to respond to their child's
emotions appropriately and mediate the
response that the child is having
without getting overwhelmed themselves
by that child's response helps the child
learn to process that emotion in a
developmentally appropriate way so to
serve as a safe container for our
children's emotions we have to first
learn to mirror those emotions back to
them and then show them the response
that's going to be more adaptive so for
example i like to think of this as let's
say you land on an alien planet okay
you've been placed on a spaceship
overnight you wake up in the morning in
an alien planet and you are given one
alien who you have contact with who is
to serve as your guide and protector on
this alien planet okay
if you get an alien who speaks fluent
english if that is your native language
you're going to feel very soothed
because that alien is going to
understand you when you tell them what
you're thinking and what you need and
they're going to be able to help you
find that but if you get an alien who
speaks your language but only in very
broken and fragmented pieces you might
start to panic because now your means of
communicating with this person who is
providing you with everything that you
need to stay alive is going to be very
difficult and this is what it's like for
a child when they have a parent who is
very emotionally literate and who is
able to respond to them in an
emotionally attuned way versus a parent
who only has limited access to emotions
because when you're an infant emotion is
your only way of communicating to this
being who is there to protect you and
give you what you need on this strange
planet that you've arrived in right so
if you have a sensitive attuned parent
who understands what emotions you're
feeling and can mirror them back to you
you feel like this parent speaks my
language they're able to decipher my
needs sometimes it might take a little
bit of extra emotion to get them to
properly understand but for the most
part when i express what my needs are
using emotions they understand and
respond appropriately that is very
calming versus if you are assigned a
parent and they only get what you mean
when you express your emotions about 10
of the time and the other 90 percent of
the time when you express your emotions
they translate it incorrectly inside
their own brains and maybe get upset or
mad at you that is going to be a very
threatening experience for you as a
child and that is the experience of
children who have insecurely attached
parents and do not have their full
emotional range available to them so if
you're on your alien planet and you send
your alien a text message and you say i
am hungry and the alien responds to you
and says oh you're hungry here's where
you go get lunch that is a very soothing
response and eventually you don't need
to text your alien anymore you can just
go to the lunch buffet because your
alien has taught you the tools for
getting your need met on your own
but if you text your alien i'm hungry
and they don't actually know what that
means so they send you a text back that
says go to the shoe store you are going
to be very confused when you end up at
the shoe store and you don't understand
where the lunch buffet is so you might
learn one of two strategies you might
learn to either send your alien 10 more
text messages trying to communicate your
need in different ways
because you know that eventually once
they get it they will respond to you and
tell you where the lunch buffet is or
you might learn to just go out onto the
alien planet on your own and search for
the lunch buffet yourself because you've
learned that your alien isn't really
able to help you because they don't
understand you enough to give you proper
direction so this is exactly what
happens with anxious and avoidant
individuals respectively the anxious
individual learns if they just try hard
enough eventually their parent will get
it and they will provide them with
guidance but they have to try so hard
that they often spend so much time
thinking about how to communicate with
their parent that their entire worldview
becomes kind of preoccupied with
learning to communicate their needs and
in the case of the avoidantly attached
person they learn that no matter how
hard they communicate something about
their parent is just incapable of
processing their full emotional range so
they're going to learn to stop trying to
communicate at all and to just go out
and try to solve the problem as much as
possible on their own but as you can see
the best possible outcome here is the
secure outcome where you are for the
most part just understood have the
resources you need provided to you and
then as you go through life you learn to
do all of these things that you can
eventually do confidently and
competently on your own and you also
learn if your alien is consistently
providing you with accurate information
that for the most part you can trust
other people to provide you with
accurate information as well you kind of
assume if i go up to another alien and i
ask them where the dinner buffet is
they're probably going to tell me where
it is because that was your experience
with your first alien and this is also
how it is for securely attached children
they learned when i show my emotions i'm
responded to sensitively and i'm given
accurate information in response so now
i expect that when i go out into the
world and share my emotions with other
people they will also give me accurate
information in response and this doesn't
always happen of course because you
might be interacting now with insecure
other people but because you have that
initial blueprint of when i go to
someone and show my emotion and they
show that they're responsive to it
that's probably a good indication that
the information they're giving me in
response is accurate so secure children
as they grow up well into adulthood tend
to be pretty good at figuring out what
the green flags are that show someone
else is going to give them accurate
information generally when they're
interacting with another secure person
they can tell because their emotions do
not scare that person off they can show
how they're feeling they can talk about
what they're feeling and thinking and
for the most part the other person
doesn't get disregulated by that and so
they can kind of trust that their
responses are going to be rational and
well thought out and thoughtful the same
way their parents were as a child and
this learning applies also to how you
approach other people who are in
distress so if when you were a child
your parents rocked you and held you and
soothed you when you were distressed now
when other people are distressed as an
adult you don't feel threatened by their
distress your instinct might be to hold
them to be kind to them to offer comfort
or support because the early world view
of the securely attached child is when
discomfort is present support is needed
and so they feel comfortable also
stepping into that position and offering
care and love and support for other
people so because their parent responded
to them in very flexible and adaptable
ways securely attached children learn to
respond to other people in flexible ways
so they don't try to use the same
approach on every single person they
meet they learned at a very young age
based on what emotion i'm expressing or
what i'm putting forth in my
relationship with my parent they respond
differently to me based on what i need
in that moment so they're also able to
offer a wide range of responses to the
people that they meet in life so if they
meet a more avoidant person they're able
to recognize this is a person who needs
some space and who doesn't want me to
come too close and i can respect that
and give them a bit of distance
or if they meet a more anxious person
they can go okay if i want to be close
to this person i have to give them a
little bit more reassurance and comfort
and nurturance or i have to set some
boundaries if not so there is this
natural flexibility with the secure
response that is not present for the
other types who have only kind of
learned one response system right so the
avoidant has kind of learned to stop
asking the other aliens for help and the
anxiously attached person has learned to
focus all of their energy on trying to
communicate their needs at the expense
of the exploration that maybe they would
otherwise be doing but the securely
attached person has learned when it's
appropriate to communicate their
feelings often in situations where
they're not really sure how to proceed
and when it's appropriate to rely on the
blueprint that they've internalized
about this kind of alien planet and just
go solve their problems for themselves
and this is why we see the most
resiliency coming out of securely
attached children because they have that
very adaptable approach to life based on
the responsiveness of their early
caregivers so again this does not mean
that the caregiver was perfect in the
case of the securely attached child
right all this means is that the
caregiver did their best to respond to
the child and they were humble about
what they didn't know if you have an
alien who doesn't know where the lunch
buffet is but they do know that they can
call their friend and ask and then relay
the information to you you're in a much
better situation than an alien who takes
it really personally when you ask them a
question they don't know the answer to
and gives you a false answer just to get
you off their back you're also in a much
better position if your alien
accidentally gives you the wrong
directions and then they can come back
to you when you end up at the shoe store
and say hey i gave you the wrong
directions let's go together to the
lunch buffet now that i understand what
i did wrong then if you have an alien
who gives you the wrong directions and
then insists that they gave you the
right directions and that you just don't
have a good sense of navigation right
the secure parent understands when they
do something wrong and to the best of
their ability they're able to correct
that mistake and help their child
understand what happened so that their
view of the world and their view of
their own inner sense of direction does
not get disrupted so the early
experiences of the securely attached
adult were often that they had parents
who could be flexible in response to
their child's emotional demands
understand what their child was
communicating to them not feel
threatened by their child's needs and to
the best of their ability give their
child what they needed and provide them
with the directions that they needed in
order to do that thing for themselves
and as a result the child grows up
learning both i can reach out to other
people and ask for support and help when
i'm struggling and don't know what to do
and also i can be autonomous and figure
things out on my own based on the
accurate information that i've been
given thus far about how the world works
and i can also give back to other people
what my caregivers gave to me which was
support empathy and the benefit of the
doubt when i was struggling and so i'm
able to offer to others the same type of
support and guidance that in my early
years was offered and modeled to me so
they can serve as a pretty good alien
guide to the next human who arrives on
that planet right all right this is one
of my metaphors that i particularly
liked so i hope that that translated to
you guys as always let me know your
thoughts in the comments of this video
i love you i hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and i will see
you back again here really soon
[Music]
you