hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this month on this channel we're talking
about heartbreak and what I want to talk
about today specifically is how having
an insecure attachment style can keep us
stuck in a cycle of choosing Partners
who are wrong for us a very common
question that comes up in the attachment
space is how do I know if I'm just
incompatible with someone versus if it's
my attachment Style that's messing up
our relationship and I think that a lot
of the time when this gets asked the
real answer to the question is both
because our attachment systems have a
tendency to keep us choosing romantic
Partners who are wrong for us and when I
say wrong for us I mean fundamentally
incompatible with us in some major way
today we're going to go over why that
happens why it is that if we have
insecure attachment Styles we might
repeatedly find ourselves drawn to
people who we aren't a natural fitwi as
well as how secure people view
relationships and how they sus out
compatibility so we're going to look
first very quickly at how this problem
tends to develop and the thing that
we're specifically going to hone in on
the most is the role of authenticity in
the dating process so those who air
securely attached tend to lead with
authenticity and compatibility is the
number one thing that they are looking
at when they're sussing out who might be
a good or bad partner for them and this
is almost the opposite for those who air
insecurely attached the reason for that
is because those who air insecurely
attached tend to have a very core wound
that got formed when they were
incredibly young around authenticity so
it's actually something that they will
be suppressing unconsciously in the
dating process which makes it really
hard to sus out compatibility I do have
a video on Attunement that actually goes
over this process in a little bit more
depth if you're wanting more from it but
for now I will give you the quick
version so first we're going to look at
what happens for the securely attached
person that gives them a secure
experience of dating and then we're
going to look at the opposite so when a
secure person comes into this world as a
little helpless baby they have no choice
but to express themselves completely
authentically to their caregivers and
this is the exact same starting point
that insecurely attached people start
from but in the case of those who grow
up secure
what happens when they express their
emotions authentically is those emotions
get seen and understood by their parent
and mirrored back to them so what the
child learns through that is it's okay
to be me it's okay to have needs and
it's okay to express them at the exact
volume that they exist so this leads to
the belief that if I am my authentic
self in relationships my needs get seen
and met and I can stay in connection
with other people which leads to the
formation of secure attachment when we
have a secure attachment style we lead
with authenticity in dating because
again that model of intimate
relationships that we internalized at a
very young age included us leading with
our authentic feelings and thoughts and
getting accepted for those so now when
we're approaching dating relationships
as securely attached people that is once
again what we're putting out there
because we're leading with authenticity
we are more likely to be finding
compatible Partners who are also sharing
their authentic selves with us that
doesn't mean that this process does not
take time it does not mean that it's
easy to find Partners who value the same
things as us and who fit neatly into our
lives but the process is not going to be
contaminated by some of the things we're
going to talk about next now we're going
to look at what happens as an insecurely
attached person is growing up so we
start from that very same place you come
into the world as a young child who has
no idea what to do other than Express
their needs
authentically however for those of us
who air insecurely attached for whatever
reason we learned authenticity is not
the way to get my needs met at some
point we had our authentic expression of
self rejected in our intimate
relationship which is with our
caregivers when we are children this
could mean they either reject displays
of vulnerability and pain or maybe they
reject displays of autonomy and strength
because they're uncomfortable with the
idea of their child not needing them in
some significant way so some part of our
identity if this is the case for us
becomes something we learn we have to
hide or obscure in order to be in
connection with other people in an
intimate way and this leads to the
development of a false self or a kind of
social mask that we learn to wear around
other people in order to get acceptance
and this mask runs so deep because it's
based upon on what we've repressed
within ourselves and failed to develop
that we might not even be conscious of
the fact that we're wearing it but at
this stage for most people who a
insecurely attached there is at least
some conscious awareness of the fact
that to be in connection with other
people we believe we have to be
operating based on some form of
relational strategy so we're thinking
both unconsciously and in some cases
consciously about how should I act so
that other people like me what sides of
myself should I show to people and what
sides of myself should I hide and it's
not that the secure child is never going
to do this to an extent this is just
part of being a social being in the
world but the insecure child is going to
do this right down to the essence of who
they are so connection is going to be
something that is deeply assumed without
that assumption ever being questioned
consciously to be something that is only
available to us if we behave in a
certain way that is not entirely
authentic so at this this point we have
an insecure attaching style we are
navigating the world in some way using
an unconscious strategy to get
connection rather than using unfiltered
authenticity to get connection so
particularly when we are approaching
dating relationships or any sort of
intimate connection we're going to have
whatever strategy we have internalized
is the way to make people like us super
online if you're anxious this might look
like hyper fix ating on what the other
person wants from you and trying to mold
yourself into the kind of person that
you think they would like if you a more
avoidant this might look like focusing
really hard on how you can stay
self-sufficient and independent so that
nobody is going to see any of your
deeper needs and grow disgusted by you
and again all of this is happening on an
unconscious level the problem is that
when we are picking people to date from
a place of strategy and masking they
don't know who we authentically are and
so it's very easy to end up in
relationships with people who we are not
at our core compatible with because we
ourselves often do not know ourselves
deeply enough to be aware of who we are
at our core never mind how we could
communicate that to someone else and
pick compatible others so what we're
going to do next is a bit of comparing
and contrasting between what a secure
relationship looks like and the kind of
founding principles of One Versus what
an insecure relationship tends to look
like and which principles tend to
underly those relationships and the
reason we're going to do this is not to
shame ourselves over the way that we
form relationships but to just start
getting an idea of how things could be
different and if we are on that journey
of earning secure attachment hopefully
this offers some hope and encouragement
around where you could take your
relationships next so one of the biggest
differences that I want to draw our
attention to right away is the
difference between how insecurely
attached people tend to unconsciously
view relationships versus the way
securely attached people do when we are
insecurely attached we necessarily have
unmet developmental needs and those
unmet needs whether that is the need for
deep emotional mirroring or whether that
is the need for mentorship those needs
are unconsciously driving us when it
comes to our partner choices so if I
feel at my core like I am not that
competent or capable of navigating the
world on my own I'm going to be
unconsciously searching first and
foremost for a partner who seems
incredibly competent and Incredibly
skilled at navigating the world enough
so that they can mentor me in that
capacity or completely take care of me
and if I am someone who is completely
out of touch with my emotional needs I
am subconsciously going to be searching
for a partner who over emotes and over
functions in the realm of proximity
seeking so that I don't have to do any
of the emotional labor that I quite
frankly don't know how to do that is
required for keeping somebody close so
insecure relationships are generally
driven from a place of lack
unconsciously we're looking at how do I
find somebody who over functions in the
area where I am underfunctioning so that
as a unit we can feel whole so this is
about kind of bringing ourselves up to a
baseline through relationship rather
than being at Baseline when choosing
partners and looking at relationships
from this lens makes us quite loss
averse because we don't want to do
anything that increases the pain we are
already in so we're going to be looking
predominantly for partners who we think
are going to help us achieve what we
need to get to that emotional Baseline
irregardless of whether or not they are
a great fit for us now let's contrast
this with what a secure person looks
like when they're forming a
relationship because securely attached
people tend to feel as though their
Baseline needs are being met either
through self-regulation or through
community and other support networks
they have they are consciously choosing
Partners from a place of Desire so
they're thinking not how do I get myself
to a place where I feel okay but now
that I I feel okay and enjoy my life and
the people in it what else do I want to
add and what type of a person might be
interested in exploring the same type of
relationship that I'm interested in
having and when we have that Baseline
state of stability both in ourselves and
in our social networks we're able to
take a lot more risks so I remember
having a conversation with a friend of
mine when I was at the beginning of a
new relationship where I said to her
well I'm afraid of losing some of the
security that I've built in my life as a
single person my life functions really
smoothly I really like the way
everything is and there's a part of me
that's kind of resistant to any of that
changing and she looked at me and went
well you can't be in the energy of
desire and the energy of safety at the
same time because desire is by nature
the act of extending Beyond ourselves
and trying to align with something that
we are not yet aligned with so it is
inherently unsafe if we Define safety
as that which we know to be predictable
and reliable and that's already
available to us and I really liked that
framing because I think that when we are
in a secure place in our lives we're
most able to choose desire and to choose
a little bit of instability knowing that
we have the skills to eventually
restabilize so because we're approaching
the entire thing from a place of
pre-established security we're able to
take a few more risks in our dating
lives we don't necessarily have to to
settle down and get really serious with
the first person who meets some of our
needs and who makes our lives a little
bit easier Our Lives already feel
resourced so we're able to experiment
more and get clearer on what it is that
we want and who is going to fit the best
into our lives before we make any
serious decisions and what helps a lot
in this process is knowing ourselves
deeply which brings us to the next point
when we are insecurely attached in some
major area we have a deep disconnection
from our sense of self again because we
have been trained to believe who I am is
not okay and I need to hide or mask some
part of myself in order to show up in my
relationships we tend to spend a lot of
time thinking who should I be who is the
version of me that would be the most
lovable and then we pick Partners based
on who the person we think we should be
would date the problem is that very
often the person we think we should be
is not the same as the person we
authentically are and when we look at
how secure people choose Partners they
are choosing from a place of who am I
and who would authentically fit with me
because they've had that experience of
getting deeply mirrored at a young age
they tend to have a pretty strong idea
of who they are what their unique
interests are what their strength
strengths and weaknesses are what they
would like to spend their time doing and
what their core values are in life and
there isn't a lot of Shame wrapping up
any of those things for them whereas in
an insecurely attached person a lot of
those authentic needs and wants we're
going to feel a lot of Shame over and
try to hide but because the secure
person does not feel chronic shame over
their core identity they're more likely
to lean fully into the things that they
really like and that bring them to life
and then those things make them seem
very attractive to compatible others as
opposed to if you are insecurely
attached you might be trying with
everything you have to hide your Core
Essence and so then you come off as kind
of in congruent when you're in
relationship with other people you're
denying parts of yourself and those
parts that you're denying might actually
be the things that if you stepped into
them would make you the most attractive
to other people because those are the
parts of you that you are most alive
inside of so a lot of the time we have
insecurely attached people resisting and
hiding the very parts of themselves that
would make them seem the most desirable
to people who they would be compatible
with and we have secure people really
highlighting and stepping into the parts
of themselves that are going to make
them the most attractive to people who
value similar things and so this makes
it a lot easier for secure people to
Source Partners who they are good fits
with because what they're putting out
there is what they want to get back and
the exact opposite tends to be true for
those of us who a insecurely attached
we're putting out something inauthentic
to us and then we're getting that thing
back and because this is all a
subconscious process we might be really
confused as to why we are not happy now
we're going to look at what happens when
you get into that relationship as an
insecurely attached person one of the
biggest unconscious functions for
insecure relationships so relationships
between two people who are not securely
attached is that it allows both people
to collude in avoiding themselves so
what do I mean by this if there is some
part of me that I think is disgusting
and bad and unworthy let's say I think
that I have to be practical all of the
time or else everybody is going to judge
me and think there's something wrong
with me who I am going to be drawn to is
a partner who sees me the way that I
think I need to be seen in order to be
accept it so I'm going to be most drawn
to Partners who don't notice the parts
of me that are actually pretty creative
and interested in other ways of doing
things so the parts of myself that I am
avoiding my partner is going to be
accidentally helping me avoid because
they're happy to accept my mask without
questioning it and vice versa if I
partner up with someone who has learned
to think of themselves as helpless in
order to stay in connection with people
and I need to see myself as very capable
and competent to stay in connection with
people I'm not going to try too hard to
push my partner into autonomy because we
are both serving the roles that we
believe we need to play in order to stay
in connection with people versus in a
secure connection there's going to be a
lot of mutual exploration because secure
people don't grow up being fearful of
any particular part of themselves
they're able to accept and encourage all
parts of their partner to come out so a
lot of the time in insecure
relationships there is this belief on
behalf of the more avoidant leaning
partner that if anyone saw my struggle
they would leave and there is an
unconscious belief on behalf of the more
anxious party if anyone saw my strength
and knew that I didn't actually need
them I would be abandoned and left alone
because again both of those things were
true for each person in their early life
but with securely attached individuals
struggles and strengths are seen and
nurtured or celebrated inside of the
self and so they look to be present with
their Partners in both of those areas as
well so often if a secure person dates
an avoidant person the avoidant person
is going to become quite disregulated if
the secure person with every good
intention tries to draw attention to any
of the areas in which they're struggling
or might need support they might see
that as an attack rather than an
invitation to learn more about
themselves and explore the ways where
they they could receive help or if the
secure person is dating a more anxious
person the more anxious person might
become very distressed if the secure
person is trying to point out the areas
where they don't actually need help or
to point out the ways in which they
could increase their autonomy so in the
case of the secure couple if both
parties are very open to exploring and
learning about themselves on a deep
level it's going to be a lot easier to
figure out what matters to them what
their values are what they want out of a
partnership because there's a really
easy and open dialogue for exploring all
of that stuff so if they find that
they're incompatible in certain ways
that's probably going to be discovered
sooner than later so the partnership
isn't going to get to 5 or 10 years down
the line before they realize that they
have fundamentally different values
because there is very little that's off
the table in terms of discussion versus
when you're dealing with a mutually
insecure couple there are a lot of
things that are going to be triggering
for either one to look at so certain
values or needs or beliefs are going to
be really heavily buried and might not
come out until 5 10 20 years down the
line maybe in some moment of overwhelm
where finally someone screams the truth
that they've been suppressing for many
many years because they fear that it
would threaten the relationship and the
thing is it might be a truth that
actually does threaten the relationship
but again a secure person would have
considered a truth that threatens the
relationship as a very important thing
to bring up and discuss because they're
more willing to have a relationship End
early if the person is not compatible
with them because again they don't see
connection and intimacy as a scarce
resource so if they're not compatible
with someone they assume it's not that
personal we should just free ourselves
up to go out and find other people we're
compatible with whereas this is not
necessarily the worldview that those who
air insecurely attached are dealing with
so what we're getting at with a lot of
this is the idea that we choose what we
are familiar with not necessarily what
is the best or most appropriate choice
so when we are insecurely attached we're
going into relationships that feel
familiar based on that base model we
have of ourselves and others so if we're
anxious we tend to feel like I'm not
okay I'm not really able to take care of
myself but other people are okay and
there's someone out there who can come
along and help me or complete me in a
way that is going to finally make me
feel safe in the world and on the flip
side of things you have that avoidant
mindset of I am okay I'm regulated and
able to take care of myself often
because all of the emotional needs that
are more vulnerable are being deeply
suppressed but you don't know that
consciously if you air avoidant but
other people are not okay and they need
help and support so I'm unconsciously
looking for a partner who can't take
care of themselves because it reinforces
my worldview of I am okay others are not
okay and vice versa with the anxious
party now the secure individual has the
worldview I am okay and other people are
okay so I know how to tend to myself
emotionally and take care of my
practical and physical needs and I am
looking for a partner who knows how to
do the same and so when each person goes
out into the dating world they're going
to go out with their blinders on
remember all of our connecting skills
skills so everything we know about how
to get and stay in an intimate
relationship is deeply entrenched by
that cycle we went through When We Were
Young so insecurely attached people look
for the inauthenticity that feels
familiar to them and securely attached
people look for the authentic intimate
connection that feels familiar to them
and I want to pause here and just say
that this is one of the areas where it's
actually quite intuitive to understand
how you can cross over from the insecure
side of the fence to the more secure one
so if what feels familiar is game
playing maske wearing and
inauthenticity how do we start giving
ourselves more experiences of our own
authenticity getting accepted so that
that can be the thing we form memories
around that then becomes familiar to us
this can be something like finding a
counselor who's securely attached
and just learning and logging inside of
our bodies what it feels like to
co-regulate with a person who is secure
and then maybe finding support groups
where we're able to be honest and
authentic while knowing we're not going
to get shamed in response because it's
an intentionally contained environment
for emotional expression and then maybe
we're able to find communities or form
friendships with people who are more
accepting of who we authentically are as
we dig more and more into to our inner
world and so over time we can start to
internalize what it feels like to be
seen for our authentic self to have that
self get mirrored back to us by a secure
other and then that can start to be a
pattern that feels familiar and I just
wanted to take a moment with that
because I think that this is something
that gets thrown out there a lot that
can make us feel kind of hopeless that
idea that we don't seek out what we want
we seek out what is familiar because
it's so unconscious and it's so true
that can leave us with the feeling of
well no matter what I do I'm just never
going to find what I want because my
system is always going to be operating
unconsciously in a way that sabotages me
but I just want to point out that we can
change what feels familiar through
putting ourselves in new experiences
where we establish a new normal that our
body starts to recognize and we're going
to get more into how to do the work
around all of this and how to start
choosing more compatible partners after
this one last point which is that in
insecure Partnerships what's often
happening is each person is keeping
themselves feeling important by solving
each other's problems so the more
anxious person tends to be
overfunctioning in the area of emotional
expression and kind of providing the
emotional glue that keeps the
partnership together and the more
avoidant partner tends to be
overfunctioning in the area of emotional
regulation and being kind of sturdy and
solid enough for both of them but in a
secure partnership it's not at all about
solving each other's problems it's about
enjoying each other's problems which
might seem like a kind of funny thing to
say but I think that what most people
don't realize is that the people who are
happiest in their lives are not people
who have a perfect life or perfect
relationships it's just people who
choose problems to struggle with that
they genuinely enjoy and the same is
true when we are picking our partners we
are never going to be able to solve
somebody else's life for them nor should
we be trying to do that that's what
codependency looks like but when we go
into Partnerships from a secure place
what we're looking at is what type of a
person do I want to support in life who
do I want to be rooting for in a very
personal and involved way probably
someone who chooses problems to tackle
with their life that you find
intrinsically interesting so this is
where we go from trying to complete each
other to trying to complement each other
and keep one another company as we
journey through life side by side so
let's say you have an insecurely
attached couple where one person feels
very competent and confident in their
worldviews they have an idea that this
is how the world works I have an answer
for everything and I'm happy to share it
and then another person who tends to
distrust the way that they look at and
make sense of the world so one worldview
is kind of answering or doing away with
the need to further examine the other
versus in a more secure Dynamic you're
going to have two people whose
viewpoints are always changing and
always growing and expanding but who
just enjoy co-regulating around it so
who enjoy coming to each other and going
I think this what do you think and
there's usually mutual respect and
humility for each other because they
have intentionally selected someone
whose ability to reason and whose
ability to show up emotionally they have
genuine respect for so they've probably
picked someone who is interested in
having the same types of conversations
and spending time with the same types of
existential questions that they like to
spend time with because at the end of
the day that's all that compatibility is
really about right what do we like to
think about how do we like to spend our
time how do we like to spend our
resource so money energy time and how do
we like to relate to each other so what
we're going to move into next next is a
bit of exploration around how we can
move from this First Column if this is
where we predominantly find ourselves
into the second one where we are
choosing Partners who we actually feel
aligned with and who we're deeply
compatible with the first thing we need
to do is go all the way back to that
beginning of the cycle where we learn to
disconnect from our authentic selves and
we need to get back in connection with
that person the person we were before
for all of the shame and all of the
conditioning took over our personality
so some questions we really want to
spend time with are questions like who
am I when I am alone with myself when I
am completely left to my own devices
what types of thoughts do I tend to have
what am I interested in what excites me
where does my attention naturally wander
and if this is really challenging for
you to think about or perhaps your
answer is my attention just wanders to
what kind of partner I would like I want
to invite you to think about the
question a little bit differently
imagine you were never going to find a
partner you could peer into a crystal
ball right now and know without a shadow
of a doubt because you are seeing the
entire rest of your life play out that
no matter what you do you will be alone
ask yourself in that situation what
would I do what would I devote my life
to what job would I work what social
networks would I build what would become
incredibly important to me if I knew for
sure that my entire rest of my life was
going to be only focused on me and my
interests the things that arise out of
this question are likely to be things
that genuinely interest and excite the
most authentic version of you and that's
the version of you that ironically needs
to be brought into the dating world the
most or you might be on the opposite
side of this spectrum so you might
actually have a fairly strong idea of
who you are and what your interests and
values are but you might have this idea
that if you showed that to someone else
they would naturally be repulsed by that
and so the question I would recommend
spending some time with if this is the
case for you is to imagine a different
Universe where exactly who you are is
the most societally celebrated and
coveted type of person so if the person
you are at your core the person who you
are when you're alone with yourself were
completely and totally universally
accepted loved and celebrated who would
that version of you look like and how
would they show up in the world and what
types of rooms would they put themselves
in and what types of conversations would
they have so in a world where no part of
you was shame bound how would you go
about trying to make connections with
other people and this is a good example
of the way you're going to need to start
connecting eventually in order to find
the people who you are compatible with
so I remember for myself a big shift
starting to happen when I recognize that
a very core part of who I am and what I
like to do with my life is this is not
going to be a shocker to anyone who's
familiar with this channel but analyze
myself and other people I love
psychology it is just a true unbridled
uncomplicated love for me but I had some
shame around that growing up I had this
idea that to be in connection with
people I had to keep things very surface
level and I had to be constantly kind of
making jokes not bothering people with
intimacy which meant not showing people
my true love of analysis and psychology
so then I would find myself in
Partnerships with people who also did
not love analysis and psychology and
then the more comfortable I would get
and the more I would relax into myself
and start bringing that into into the
relationship accidentally the more I
would get rejected or the more I would
be seen as prying or as potentially
criticizing the relationship Dynamic
when what I was actually doing was just
being excited to talk about and analyze
it because that is what I love to do
from the absolute core of me and when I
accept it this is just what I love and I
need to be seeking out intimate
connections with people who also love
this my entire way of relating to people
drastically changed and so did my social
network and sometimes that's how it
works we arrive at these truths about
oursel that feel so obvious it's almost
annoying in retrospect but that we don't
realize have become so shame bound that
we have just pushed them aside for the
majority of our lives and those are the
very things in a lot of cases that allow
us to connect really deeply with
compatible people who value the same
things so the next thing I want to bring
up and this is similar to the first
question is if you do really struggle
with using relationships as a means of
fulfilling your needs ask yourself if
all of my needs were met if I were to
develop into a securely attached person
then who would I want in my life solely
because I would enjoy being around them
so instead of what are my deficits and
how can I balance them out
interpersonally who would I enjoy being
around solely because I like them so I
kind of like to think of this as what I
call the porch test and I think I stole
this from How I Met Your Mother actually
I believe that um Lily Aldren who's a
character in that show brought this up
but it's the idea that when you're
thinking of who you want to bring into
your life in an intimate way picture
yourself sitting on a porch with them in
your old age and ask yourself is this
someone who I'm probably still excited
to just sit next to and talk with now
that all of the trials and tribulations
of our young life are over with is this
someone whose company on a core level I
just genuinely enjoy or not and this is
the single biggest question that helped
me personally turn around the way I
looked at romantic relationships in
particular instead of looking at who can
bring what to my life and vice versa
looking at who do I like to just be with
when all other needs are filled who do I
just like spending my time with this is
important for any form of intimate
connection so Partners friends anyone
we're bringing into our life by choice
that front porch test can be a really
good visualization exercise the next
question we might want to spend some
time with is how do I like to give love
I like to help people go really deep
with themselves and understand
themselves better but if I'm with a
partner who doesn't want to do that
we're not going to be very compatible
and the same is true for any way that we
really like to give love but that's
often something we don't spend a lot of
time really thinking about how do I find
someone who values that which I enjoy
giving and vice versa how do I enjoy
being loved what makes me feel like
another person is really seeing and
getting me and how do I go out looking
for someone who naturally likes giving
that thing and again we're not looking
at this from a deficit model so it's not
I need this thing and can't get it on my
own it's this form of companionship and
love is the type that naturally enriches
my life and the last question I
encourage you to spend time with is what
really turns me on and excites me in a
person so where is my sense of Desire
oriented and also what makes me feel
really safe with a person both of those
things are going to be really big
non-negotiables if we want to have a
relationship with someone we are
actually compatible with those questions
answer a lot about what our
interpersonal values are and what it
takes to make a committed relationship
work
longterm now before I end us off here I
just want to note that a lot of the
things that keep us out of our authentic
selves when we're in connection with
other people are related to feeling a
lot of shame or struggling to stay
present with ourselves so I am going to
link a bunch of videos in the
description of this one that I've made
in the past that go over how to work
with shame and how to get to know
ourselves better so that we're able to
stay more authentic with the people in
our lives both when we're forming new
connections as well as when we are
dating all right that is all I have to
say for today on this topic as always
let me know any thoughts feelings
questions that are coming up for you in
the comment section I love you guys I
hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other and I will see you back
here again really
soon
oh