hey guys heidi preep here if you follow
this channel or come here regularly you
know that we talk a lot about attachment
style and attachment theory and
obviously this is a theory that i'm
super passionate about it is so useful
in so many ways but i also see this
theory getting absolutely bastardized
online all of the time so people will
use it in ways that are almost the
direct opposite of how we are supposed
to be using our understanding of our
inner dynamics and other people's inner
dynamics so i wanted to make a quick
video to talk about the best and worst
uses for attachment theory many of these
are things that i actively see happening
online all of the time and i just want
to take a moment and remind us all that
we develop these theories of human
understanding for a reason and it's
meant to make our lives and other
people's lives better right and in many
cases that absolutely is how people are
interacting with this information i get
lots of comments about how you guys are
using this information in super
productive ways and nothing on earth
makes me happier than that when i hear
someone say i am showing up for myself
in a better way i feel more capable of
being a better friend and partner or
just person in the world based on what
i've been learning about attachment
theory that makes my heart just rejoice
like i feel so happy in those moments
because i believe so strongly that this
theory can be used for so much good in
the world so we are going to talk a
little bit now about how to do that and
how to avoid some of the kind of
temptations around how you could use
this theory so i have a couple of do's
and don'ts for us here so do use
attachment style for self-understanding
and gaining awareness of your blind
spots so use it to figure out which of
these profiles you fall into which of
these world views you are embodying
whether it is secure anxious avoidant or
fearful avoidant and then do the work of
really figuring out what does that mean
about where my blind spots are what does
that mean about the ways i could be
showing up in the world that would be
healthier for myself and other people
where i currently default to something
different and how can i be honest and
humble enough with myself to truly
understand which of my unconscious
biases are creating problems for me and
the people i love
now do not use this theory as a
personality system now it's tricky
because attachment styles do absolutely
impact our personality right the way
that we show up in the world and the
behaviors that we do and the actions
that we take are often very direct
reflections of our attachment style and
thoughts beliefs worldviews actions that
are repeated for a long enough period of
time absolutely qualify as part of our
personality however this is not like
other personality systems like
myers-briggs or the enneagram where
there is this core assumption that our
type cannot be changed and so what we
should be using the system for is just
celebrating whatever quirks we have that
make us that type and working with our
natural energy by leaning into our
personality with attachment styles a lot
of the things that are kind of the
dominant traits of the insecure styles
are actually quite unhealthy so we
should not be leaning further into those
traits once we learn about them what we
should be trying to do is start changing
the way that we show up using the
information we now have because these
are not unchangeable styles attachment
style can be changed and that is one of
the core differentiators of this theory
from different personality systems where
it's more about celebrating and leaning
into our strengths right attachment
style points out more weaknesses or
challenges we might have if our style is
not secure and it also gives us a route
forward for working in the direction of
security if that's not where our current
center of gravity is do use attachment
styles to improve your relationships so
you can use this understanding of a
where you're coming from and be where
other people are coming from to figure
out how to do things like navigate
conflict more directly and more
effectively to give people more of what
they need to learn to meet people more
in the middle in terms of your differing
needs there's a lot of awareness around
these styles and these predispositions
of thinking of relationships in certain
ways that we can also just let people
know about and improve our relationships
through having new and increased
language for what's going on right if
you're having a fight with your partner
it can be really helpful to go hey i'm
noticing that i'm having a really strong
anxious response which means i'm doing
this this and this i'm noticing that
that might be polarizing you a little
bit into an avoidant response which i'm
guessing is happening because i see you
do this this and this what do you think
about that it gives you new language for
navigating difficult interpersonal
situations and that is a great way to
use attachment theory
but
do not
use attachment theory to manipulate
other people or try to get them to do
what you want this is the single biggest
misuse of attachment theory that i see
happening left right and center online
so there is so much content out there
around like how to win someone back
based on their attachment style how to
convince someone of something based on
their attachment style do not use it to
manipulate other people trying to
manipulate other people trying to get
other people to do what you want against
their authentic wishes is ironically a
massively insecurely attached response
when you are coming from a secure place
you're able to take people at face value
when they tell you what they want and
you're able to figure out how you can
get what you want without having to
manipulate other people so for the love
of god if someone tells you they don't
want to be with you absolutely you can
have conversations with someone you can
be honest about your wants and needs and
telling them that you would like to be
with them but do not
figure out what their attachment style
is and then try to manipulate them into
thinking they want to be with you when
actually they know they don't that is
just so unethical and it's funny because
when you have like recovery circles so
codependents anonymous for example has
this kind of specific rule that you're
not supposed to be using recovery jargon
to manipulate other people or to try to
get them to do what you want it's kind
of baked into their philosophies that a
certain number of people are just going
to learn all of this language and then
use it to try to sound like they know
what they're talking about in order to
get other people to do certain things
that they want which actually works
against the very premise of codependence
anonymous which is you do not have
control over other people and you should
not try to have control over other
people and the same goes for attachment
theory if someone tells you what they
need what they want and that thing is
not what you need or want even if that
thing is you and a relationship with you
you have to respect that it doesn't
matter how much you know about their
attachment style people do not change
until they are ready and willing to
change and trying to manipulate other
people into making a change that they
don't want to make because you
understand where their attachment
triggers and wounds are and you can kind
of get in there and mess around with
them in a way that they don't understand
is not a good way to use attachment
theory do not use it that way use it in
a very direct honest and straightforward
way if you're going to use it in your
relationships right tell your partner
about attachment theory if you're going
to be using attachment theory to help
you understand your interactions with
them be honest in the way that you're
using this theory do not use it to
manipulate other people who don't know
that you know this about how they are
does that make sense and the way to tell
because there are some gray areas here
right like let's say you're secure and
you're using this theory to understand
that your anxiously attached friends
might need a little bit more
responsiveness from you and your
avoidant friends are going to need a
little bit more space and i wouldn't say
that that's manipulative because i would
say that it's playing to what people are
already doing you're just able to
respect how they're showing up
authentically in a better way that helps
you draw appropriate boundaries and
attachment theory can be excellent for
helping you understand where you need
boundaries drawn but the second you are
using this theory to try to get someone
to do something that they would not
otherwise do unless you were subtly
manipulating the situation now you're in
manipulation territory and you are
working against your own attachment
healing last to do with attachment
theory is do use it to understand your
past and understand what is not
necessarily your fault so a lot of
people end up coming to attachment
theory because they have these kind of
painful experiences that they're having
in relationships over and over and over
again and they don't understand why it's
happening or they might have chronically
low self-esteem or chronic issues asking
for help or letting people into their
lives and they don't understand why and
attachment theory gives us a good lens
through which we can recontextualize our
past experiences in such a way that we
understand why the things happen to us
the way they did by understanding our
family dynamics understanding our
parents attachment systems in a lot of
cases is very helpful and we can gain
this really elevated sense of awareness
about why we're acting in the way that
we're acting but it's really important
to understand that this does not excuse
the way we're acting which is the last
don't don't use attachment theory to
excuse your bad behavior or to evade
responsibility for doing better now that
you know better you are unfortunately
i'm sorry to report responsible for
doing better so there is a very
important principle that i always try to
remind people to keep at the center of
their attachment healing work which is
that this is not your fault but it is
your responsibility to fix and a lot of
the time people pair those principles
together so they think anything that is
not my fault if i didn't cause the
problem i'm not responsible for fixing
it and so sometimes early on in our
attachment journey it can feel like wait
a minute now that i see that it's not my
fault i am this way i have these
predispositions to think and react in
certain ways that means that i can kind
of use this as an excuse for why i'm
being the way i'm being in relationships
oh i'm anxiously attached which means i
just need an abnormal amount of
reassurance from my partners and i
deserve to get it from them because it's
not my fault that i'm like this or oh
i'm an avoidantly attached person which
means i just need way more space and i
don't need to respond to people or care
about what people are feeling because
i'm just not wired that way right those
are both really immature responses to
attachment theory the mature response to
attachment theory is to recognize i had
these blind spots that i was not aware
of now i see where those blind spots
came from and therefore i understand how
and why i can now change them when we
are just doing things and we don't
understand why we're doing them it can
feel very difficult to make long-term
changes because we don't know what the
mechanisms of those changes are right we
don't know where our impulses are coming
from we don't know when they're going to
pop up and so it's hard to plan around
things like attachment issues but when
we become aware of our worldview we
understand why it formed the way it did
we can now understand when we are no
longer in a situation where it makes
sense for us to act in that old way
we're now able to discern which actions
make sense in which situations and now
that we have that discernment available
to us we are responsible for figuring
out how to show up in a new better way
that is not harmful to the people around
us because if you are insecurely
attached by virtue of the fact that
you're insecurely attached it means you
have major blind spots interpersonally
and wherever we have blind spots we're
probably creating problems either for
ourselves or for other people or in many
cases both that we don't know we're
creating and again it's not our fault
that we're doing that right we would not
choose that nobody would choose to have
the plethora of problems that goes along
with having an insecure attachment style
but
once we know better it's our
responsibility to start doing better and
so if there's anything you're going to
take away from this video it is that do
not use this to excuse bad behavior or
to try to make other people behave
differently use it as a means of showing
up in a better way in the world we can
laugh at ourselves and we can take
ourselves lightly but do not take
yourself or your attachment style so
lightly that you continue to create
problems once you know they're there
that you now have the opportunity to
change
and again this doesn't mean you're
always going to get it right it doesn't
mean it's not going to be difficult
along the way but when we know better we
are tasked with the responsibility of
doing better and that is my hope for
absolutely all of us myself included
with attachment healing work right it's
about showing up in the world in a
better more informed and more
compassionate way both with
self-compassion and other compassion all
right let me know in the comments how
you guys are using attachment theory to
make your own lives better and i really
mean it when i say i don't always have
the time to respond individually to
every comment but i really do read them
and it truly more than you guys know
makes me so happy to know that there are
so many people out there who are
actively working to check themselves and
to show up in a better way in the world
that truly just gives me hope for the
human race so thank you guys for being
the type of people who are doing that
work because it's really hard but really
really vital work alright until next
time i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and i will see you back here again
really soon
[Music]