hey guys heidi preeb here today i wanted
to make a video that is in part an
encouragement video for those of you who
are going through the attachment healing
process and maybe feel like things
aren't happening as quickly as you'd
like them to happen maybe you're feeling
frustrated because you have been stuck
in a certain stage of your healing
process for what feels like too long and
this video is also going to serve as a
bit of a model for what to expect as you
start the attachment healing process so
for this video what i want to do is walk
us through a model called the conscious
competence model so who came up with
this model is a little bit difficult to
trace according to wikipedia a man named
martin m broadwell first described this
model in 1969 as the four levels of
teaching then someone named paul curtis
and philip warren mentioned the model in
their 1973 book the dynamics of life
skills coaching and the model was used
by gordon training international by its
employee noelle burch in the 1970s and
it was called the four stages of
learning any new skill so this is a
model that is traditionally applied to
learning not necessarily to
psychotherapy or to doing psychotherapy
work however when you are healing your
attachment style what you're doing is
learning what you are doing is opening
up your psyche to new information and
new ways of looking at the world and
rewiring your brain to start thinking
differently and that is absolutely a
learning process so the four stages of
learning or the conscious competence
model absolutely applies to attachment
healing and in this video i'm gonna walk
us through what it looks like and how we
can relate it to our attachment journey
so there are four stages to this model
that details the process of learning the
first stage is called unconscious
incompetence the second stage is called
conscious incompetence the third stage
is called conscious competence and the
fourth stage is called unconscious
competence and i'm going to walk you
through each of those stages and what
those phrases mean so the first stage
unconscious incompetence is also
sometimes referred to as the ignorance
stage and the reason we call it that is
because we are quite literally at this
stage ignorant to both the problem that
we're up against and the reason why we
aren't getting the results that we want
and this is very often the first step in
an attachment healing journey because
people start noticing i have let's say
problems in my relationships i have
trouble holding down a serious
relationship i am constantly
experiencing conflict with people and i
don't know why and when you're in the
unconscious incompetence phase of
attachment healing what you are often
doing is projecting left right and
center so you can even be aware of what
your attachment style is and still be
unconsciously incompetent when it comes
to attachment work because as long as
you are believing that you are not in
any way a part of the problem you are
not yet conscious of what the real
problem is so i see a lot of people for
example in facebook groups centered
around attachment healing that have
maybe just received the label of
insecurely attached whether it's fearful
avoidant avoidant or anxious and they
will still be there just trying to fix
their partner instead of fixing their
own attachment style believing i will be
happy and i will be in a secure loving
stable relationship once my partner
changes is absolutely unconscious
incompetence it's not until we become
aware of how our own attachment systems
are impacting our ability to have
healthy relationships that we graduate
into the next stage of learning so to
graduate into conscious incompetence
which is the next step we have to be
both aware of our own contribution to
the problem and also see the value of
the new skill that we need to learn so
when it comes to attachment healing the
new skill that we need to learn is the
ability to relate healthily to other
people and depending on what your
attachment style is that's going to look
different right if you're avoidant it's
going to be a lot of work around
developing emotional awareness and being
able to take your own and the feelings
of other people seriously if you are
anxiously attached it's going to be a
lot of learning self-regulation skills
and understanding how to keep yourself
centered even when someone else is
behaving in a way that you find
stressful and if you are fearful
avoidant it's going to be a mix of those
skills however we have to first
recognize that we have a problem that is
not going to be solved by someone else
changing and also understand there's a
skill we can learn that will help us to
show up differently and once those two
conditions are met we can move on to the
next stage which is conscious
incompetence which i will acknowledge
does not sound that exciting but it's a
really important step so conscious
incompetence is also known as the
awareness stage and this stage i believe
can actually be the most frustrating of
all of the stages because this is a
stage where you're aware that you have a
problem you're aware that you need new
skills to solve it but you don't yet
have a firm grasp on those skills so the
point of this phase is to observe
yourself to learn where you need to do
healing work and what's going wrong and
to get a really deep really nuanced
understanding of the problem okay that's
why we call it awareness so in this
stage a lot of people want to kind of
skip directly to the third stage which
is where you're implementing the
solutions but we can't implement
solutions until we know exactly where
the problems are
when they show up and why they show up
and so first there has to be a period of
time when we're working on our
attachment styles where we just notice
when are we getting triggered when are
we getting dysregulated when do we find
it really hard to show up in a healthy
way and relate to other people in a way
that is both compassionate and rational
so during this phase a lot of people
feel like because i have the awareness
of the problem i should also have the
solution but again that is not how it
works it would be great if that were how
it worked but this is a really important
phase in and of itself because you are
learning where you've been keeping
yourself stuck and when it comes to
attachment systems these are problems
that often permeate through so many
areas of our lives right like we might
think okay my attachment wounding is the
reason why i can't have a healthy
relationship but when we become
consciously incompetent we also start to
notice oh it impacts the way that i
approach my work it impacts my
friendships it impacts my self-esteem it
impacts the way that i think about the
future so we can start noticing left
right and center all of these areas that
our attachment style is responding to
and in the next couple stages we are
going to need to start applying new
skills to all of those areas if we're
able to notice as much as humanly
possible in this step then we're able to
kind of understand what the root causes
are of these problems as opposed to
treating symptoms in a bunch of
different areas as they come up so for
example let's say you are always
procrastinating at work and you're also
always starting fights with your partner
and you're also always emotionally
eating okay these things might seem
disconnected from each other but when we
look at the overall patterns that are
forming across multiple areas of our
lives we might start to realize i do all
of those things when i feel insecure and
so the root of this problem is my
feelings of unworthiness and if you can
tackle that problem at the root all of
the symptoms are going to naturally
disappear on their own right so you can
stop this kind of endless battle of
trying to apply solutions to all of the
symptoms you can get rid of the problem
at the root and that is ultimately going
to save you a lot more time but in order
to figure out where the root is we have
to move through the conscious
incompetence phase of this model where
we're just noticing noticing our bad
behavior noticing our disproportionate
reactions noticing all of the ways in
which our lives are not working for us
and once we have a really clear idea of
that then we can move on to the next
stage which is conscious competence
conscious competence is also known as
the learning stage so this is the stage
where you know how to do something but
you need to concentrate pretty
intensively in order to do it it is not
yet second nature so when it comes to
attachment healing let's look at working
with triggers right phase one of the
model might be not even knowing when
you're triggered and thinking that all
of your triggered responses are truly a
reflection of the situation and then
when you reach phase two of the model
you might be able to consciously notice
when you're triggered and that doesn't
mean that you can fix the trigger you
might continue to explode anyway but at
stage three you're able to both
recognize when you're triggered and also
implement a different response so these
can be tools that you do both in the
moment like having a strategy for what
to do when you're triggered or it can
also be things that you do proactively
so let's say you are avoidant and you
struggle to notice what you're feeling
and respond to it appropriately
conscious competence might look like you
setting an alarm on your phone four
times a day where every time it goes off
you sit down and notice what's going on
in your body and what's going on in your
mental space and that might be the
practice of you training yourself to
become sensitized to your emotional
experience and if you're anxiously
attached this might look like you
proactively building a healthier
relationship with yourself by keeping
promises to yourself by working on
things that you're really excited about
by filling your life up with comfort and
stability so that you're better able to
regulate your emotions when someone else
is not available so when you're at this
stage you are implementing a lot of new
solutions and new strategies but you're
not yet doing them without thinking you
really have to focus on it when you're
triggered you really have to take a step
back go i'm experiencing a trigger i am
not going to react to it in my old way
i'm going to use the tools that i've
been learning in therapy or online
or that i've developed proactively for
myself and i'm going to apply them here
and it might feel like you are going
against your natural energy with
everything you have it might feel
incredibly difficult to implement at
first but i promise you the more that
you practice the tools that you are
learning the more you will begin to do
them on autopilot okay so it can take a
very long time to work through this
stage it can take years in fact i would
say it often does it takes a really long
time for us to start rewiring our brains
to think and respond differently on
autopilot okay but the conscious
competence phase of the model is the
part that you cannot give up on you
cannot because i promise you you are
learning even when it doesn't feel like
you are and you will make mistakes and
you will mess up and you will not get it
right and that's okay too right a lot of
the time there's kind of a feedback loop
between steps two and three of this
process maybe you have really good
solutions for dealing with your
attachment wounding in some areas of
your life but in other areas you're
still really struggling and i want to
encourage you to adopt the mindset of no
failure just feedback here okay so even
if a new strategy doesn't work and you
just can't do it your emotions your
attachment system just got the better of
you that's okay use that as information
adjust your approach and keep going
because if you can get through this
phase of the attachment healing process
you eventually graduate to the final
level of the model which is unconscious
competence otherwise known as mastery
when you are at this level it means that
you have practiced the new skill so many
times and in so many different
situations that you no longer have to
consciously focus on it in order to do
it and what this means in the attachment
healing process is that you have reached
a place where you have earned secure
attachment you no longer have to
consciously remind yourself to think
differently about a situation or to
react differently to a situation that
used to trigger you you are now
automatically thinking and responding
differently it's no longer a tug of war
between the old response and the new
response the new response is now your
go-to response and this is such an
incredible place to reach in your
attachment healing journey because this
is the stage when you finally feel safe
in your own body you finally feel
comfortable in your own skin you finally
feel like you know how to spot people
who are trustworthy and you're
comfortable trusting them you can be
both independent and interdependent and
it doesn't feel like a herculean effort
to do any of that stuff it's just your
natural state you might be naturally
noticing your emotions as they come up
and you might be naturally able to
self-soothe when you're stressed out or
experiencing a difficult or painful
feeling you might have worked through
some of the traumas or wounds you used
to have that would cause you to get
triggered and you might not be getting
triggered as often if at all anymore and
from an attachment perspective we would
call this the point where your internal
working model of attachment
relationships has fundamentally shifted
you are now looking at yourself as a
secure base as someone that you can
trust and rely on to keep you safe and
you're also able to trust and rely on
other people because you know how to
notice red and green flags and react
appropriately to each one and that
doesn't take a humongous deal of
conscious discernment you are tuned in
to your own emotional responses and to
other people so you're much more able to
root out who you can trust and who you
can't without applying an incredible
amount of conscious effort to the task
and so what i want you to take away from
this video more than anything else is
that if you are at any phase in your
attachment healing journey you are not
failing for not having mastered it
already okay even unconscious
incompetence is a necessary phase right
and most of us are in unconscious
incompetence when we first become aware
of our attachment styles and it takes a
while to begin to wrap our minds around
the fact that maybe we're kind of at
cause of a lot of these problems and to
move into the next stage and there can
be so much frustration along the way
especially when we're at the point where
we're able to recognize what we're doing
wrong but we don't yet have the skills
to do something different but i just
want to encourage you keep going
noticing matters awareness is humongous
and so is building up that skill set i
promise you that if you persist it will
eventually start running on autopilot
and that will make your life
so much better in ways that i am certain
you cannot even imagine right now if
you're at the beginning of this process
attachment really permeates through so
much of our lives which means that when
we start healing it we start healing
every different area of ourselves so i
wanted to start off the new year with
this video because last year at this
time i decided that i would devote the
entirety of my year to healing my
attachment style and that would be my
number one priority and i could not have
imagined and i really mean this at this
point last year where i'd be right now
and the decisions i'd be capable of
comfortably making at this point in my
life and the way that i would be able to
think about myself and other people and
the compassion and understanding that i
would be able to extend towards myself
and other people i could not have
imagined this i didn't know you could
have an experience of life that feels
like this and so if you are starting
today on your attachment healing journey
i just want to use this video to
encourage you that you are in for
something that is so rewarding so
rewarding even when it feels frustrating
as hell along the way okay i believe in
you i really truly believe that we all
have the capability to change if and
when we are ready to commit ourselves to
doing so and so if this is a journey
that you're on i hope to see you back
here over the course of this year i love
you guys happy new year and i will see
you again here soon
[Music]
you