hey guys I'm Heidi PRI welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if you're new here
this summer on this channel we are
talking about
neuroticism and this video is going to
be one of a two-part series on defense
mechanisms and the reason I want to talk
about defense mechanisms is first of all
because I think they get a really bad
kind of undeservedly bad reputation
within the psychology community so when
we think of defense mechanisms we tend
to think a person who is not living in
reality who's exploding on people who's
refusing to change their point of view
and while all of those things can
definitely be true around how defense
mechanisms show up what we often don't
stop to consider is the wisdom behind
our defense mechanisms and the very
important role that they're playing in
helping us navigate the world in the
absence of more accurate information so
what we're going to be talking about
today is essentially how we come to form
defense mechanisms what they do a really
good job at protecting us from and how
they actually help us to navigate our
lives and before we understand this I
think it's really hard to change our
defense mechanisms because we're not
going to be aware of all of the ways
that they are serving us so this video
is going to build heavily on the last
video that I put out on neuroticism so
if you haven't seen that one I'm going
to link it in the description of this
video you might want to check it out
first to kind of get your head around
what we're saying but for those of you
who have seen that we're going to go
into how nurotic feelings or neurotic
patterns of experiencing Our Lives is a
natural precursor to developing defense
mechanisms so we're going to look at
this as a process how do we end up in a
place where a defense mechanism is our
best way of navigating the world step
one in this process is we develop a
blind spot so blind spots are something
that happened through the process of
what John bulby called Defensive
exclusion if you've been around this
channel for a while that will not be a
new term to you but essentially when we
are very young anything that it would be
overwhelmingly psychologically
threatening for us to integrate our
brains learn to repress on our behalfs
now what would be overwhelmingly
psychologically threatening to integrate
usually any type of information that
would disconnect us when we are very
young from our caregivers so for example
if your caregivers became very
distressed when you were looking for
emotional support because maybe they
didn't know how to give it and that made
them feel incompetent you may have
learned very early on if I show distress
around my emotional needs I get rejected
and to a child being rejected by your
parents gets logged as a survival threat
so what's high highly likely to happen
is your body is going to start naturally
repressing your emotional needs on your
behalf so you develop a blind spot
consciously around the fact that you
need comfort for your emotional needs
you might truly start believing as you
grow up that as long as all of your
practical needs are met that's kind of
all you need you don't think to check in
on whether or not your emotional needs
are getting fulfilled or let's say it's
the opposite let's say you developed a
blind spot around your need for
Independence maybe when you were a child
any steps you took towards asserting
your Independence and becoming a
separate person from your parents felt
very threatening to them and so they
would tend to subtly reject you in the
areas where you were trying to
differentiate from them what may have
happened as a result of that is your
brain learned to naturally repress its
own desire for Independence so as you
grew up you didn't naturally learn about
setting boundaries and differentiate
what you want from what other people
want it's an area that you just don't
think to check in on and so what I would
qualify as a blind spot is any area of
Our Lives that needs to be attended to
in order for us to have reasonably well
functioning mental health but that
doesn't kind of show up when we try to
do an audit of what is and isn't working
in our lives because we don't have the
conscious awareness that that's an area
we need to tend to so if I have that
blind spot around needing comfort and
emotional support from other people when
I'm going through a tough time in my
life and I start feeling off I'm not
going to go well are my emotional
support needs being met I'm going to
look at other areas of my life and maybe
some of those areas are going really
well maybe I'm doing a great job of
solving the Practical problems in my
life and keeping myself stable despite
going through a hard time so I might
look at all of the programs that I do
have running and go well these programs
are running really smoothly
but again there's a program that I don't
know needs to be running in order for me
to stay emotionally balanced which is
that need for comfort and support that
is completely offline so I'm going to
start feeling confused if I don't feel
like I'm at 100% because as far as I am
consciously aware I running all of the
programs I need to be running for
optimal functioning but for some reason
I don't feel great or in the opposite
direction let's say I never really learn
the skill of tuning into what feels good
or bad to me when it comes to
interpersonal relationships and so I
have a blind spot in the area of being
assertive and setting boundaries I just
never really learned that that was a
skill that could be used and so I might
one day wake up and go why am I so
unhappy in all of my relationships why
am I attracting all of these really
difficult people who don't treat me very
well and we might check the programs
that we did learn to use which might
look something like be kind to everybody
and if somebody hurts your feelings tell
them that your feelings are hurt and
then hope that they take that into
account and change their behavior and
that might be a really great program to
have online and running when you are in
relationship with secure people but you
might be totally unaware of the fact
that you need to have a different
program online for when you are working
with people who are happy to cross
boundaries and to not take your feelings
at face Val
and lacking that program and not having
it online is likely to cause you a great
deal of continued distress because there
are going to be these Perpetual problems
popping up if you're not setting
boundaries in the area where you need to
be setting boundaries the same way
there's going to be Perpetual problems
popping up if you're not looking for
comfort in the areas where you need
emotional comfort and support and so
what happens when we have these blind
spots when there are these kind of
psychological programs that we need to
have running in order to stay healthy
and balanced in our lives but that we do
not know we need to have running and
that we do not know we're lacking what
often happens is we start to develop
Neurosis Neurosis once again really
quickly is when we have an unconscious
conflict so when one part of us really
needs or wants something but we're not
consciously aware of the the fact that
we need or want that thing and
consciously we might actually think that
we don't want that thing or that that
thing is unnecessary or that we already
have that thing maybe you think that
your surface level relationships are in
fact providing you with enough comfort
and support when they're not because you
didn't have those early experiences that
taught you what deep intimacy feels like
or maybe you think that you're asserting
yourself and standing up for yourself
when what you're really doing is trying
to change somebody else's Behavior
because you didn't have those early
experiences of learning I can assert
myself and set my boundaries and be a
separate person so when we lack these
early blueprints we often end up feeling
the consequences of neglecting these
areas of our lives but we don't connect
them to these programs that we're
failing to run because we don't know
that that's happening so the feelings
that show up as a result of neglecting
these areas of Our Lives are what we
call neurotic feelings we might start
feeling depressed if our emotional
support needs aren't getting met or we
might start feeling perpetually angry
and anxious if we feel like we're
perpetually getting taken advantage of
but we aren't going to know why we feel
those things because when we go checking
our lives for problems nothing's going
to pop up on that audit because we don't
think to check those programs so I like
to think of neurotic feelings as real
feelings with the the wrong attribution
so what I'm feeling is never made up
it's never coming out of nowhere but I
might not understand what that feeling
is connected to in my external
environment so there's a mismatch
between our inner worlds and our outer
worlds we're not clear on how those two
things are impacting each other so
lacking intimacy and connection for long
enough might lead us to feelings of
depression but we don't know why we feel
depressed it feels like it's just coming
out of nowhere or not asserting
ourselves for long enough and not
setting boundaries in our lives can lead
us to develop low self-esteem because
when we are continuously not standing up
for ourselves the signal that sends to
ourselves is hey you're not very
valuable even though that's an
unconscious thing that's happening and
so we might have this Perpetual low
sense of self-esteem with no idea where
it is coming from because again we're
going to check that programming and go
I'm being nice to everybody so why would
my self-esteem be low a good person is
someone who's nice to everybody so It's
tricky to figure out what's happening
but this can very often lead to a meta
feeling so a meta feeling is simply a
feeling that we have about another
feeling so if I feel depressed but I
don't know why and it goes on for a
really long period of time I'm likely to
start feeling kind of anxious about that
because maybe my life has a lot of
demands that I need to be online and at
full capacity to meet but when I'm
depressed I can't meet those demands so
I might start getting anxious about the
fact that I am depressed and I might go
okay I really need to figure out why I'm
depressed so that I can get back to my
day-to-day activities or if my
self-esteem is really low I might start
getting anxious about the fact that I
can't get myself to kind of go for what
I want in life or seize the
opportunities that I want to seize
because I think so lowly of myself so I
might identify that this low self-esteem
is something that needs to be tackled
but the problem is that I don't know
where it's coming from so I might start
feeling anxious that I don't know what
the solution to my problem is and if
this is something we experience
frequently so if we have a lot of
neurotic feelings which means feelings
that we don't understand the attribution
for we might go one step further than
that sense of anxiety as a metap feeling
and start feeling what I call
existential anxiety so this feeling of
is my inner World connected to my outer
World in any meaningful way period or am
I just crazy are my feelings and my
thoughts even remotely rational and
connected to anything or am I just
broken is there just something
fundamentally wrong with me and all of
the things that are supposed to make me
happy for whatever reason just don't
make me happy or all of the things that
are supposed to make me calm just don't
make me calm and this kind of line of
questioning is a very threatening and
scary one for our psychological
well-being we all need on a deep level
to believe that our inner world is
connected to the outer World in some
meaningful way it is what gives us a
sense of agency in the world it is what
allows us to take meaningful and
directed action in our lives and it's
overall what gives our life a sense of
meaning the idea that our inner world is
connected to the world of people and
things and so if we have lost the plot
on how those things are connected
because we have these blind spots that
are creating feelings that we now don't
know how to connect to the outer world
what we are going to do is try to find
any way possible to connect our inner
world to the outer one so we are going
to try to escape these feelings of
anxiety or existential anxiety by
employing the use of Defense mechanis Ms
a defense mechanism can be thought of as
the best sense making we are able to do
around a blind spot so when I say sense
making I mean if I were to give you a
whole bunch of data points and ask you
can you try to figure out how these data
points are related to each other what
you would be doing is searching for some
way to make sense of those data points
now if all of those data points were
actually relevant to what I was asking
you to make sense of you would probably
come up with something pretty coherent
but if I was actually excluding a whole
bunch of data points that were really
relevant to the conclusion I was asking
you to make you would not be able to
come up with a very good conclusion that
resembled reality you might be able to
come up with something that kind of half
resembled the truth and this is what
it's like trying to make sense of the
connection between our inner and outer
world when we have significant blind
spots it's like there's sets of data
that are missing from the processing
we're trying to do around something so
we can kind of think of the neurotic
feelings we have as children children
don't understand why they're feeling
what they're feeling a lot of the time
they need parents who understand them
better than they understand themselves
to be patient with them to hear them out
and to help them make sense of their
feelings so if when we're growing up we
have parents who are able to do that
with us what happens is we learn to do
it for our elves as we grow up so we
become our own wise inner parents and
when we're feeling something that we
don't understand even if it's
distressing we learn to be patient with
ourselves to be present with our
feelings to be present with the
circumstances of our lives and to try to
make sense of what's happening but if we
did not have a solid model of that
growing up what we often do when we feel
something we don't understand is move
immediately to that place of panicking
and the the reason why we do that is not
a moral failing it's because we may have
given up hope on finding the real ways
in which our inner and outer world are
connected because maybe we internalize
some things like all of my feelings are
crazy or feelings in general are
irrational and don't make sense so
instead of sitting with our feelings and
listening to them and integrating what
they're telling us what we immediately
do when our inner children become
disregulated is call in a babysitter in
the form of a defense mechanism so
defense mechanism can kind of be thought
of as a 17-year-old caregiver they are
able to help us enough when we're
disregulated and confused about the
world to make sure that we don't die but
they are not mature or wise enough the
way a well-functioning inner parent
would be to help us make sense of the
world in a way that is accurate and
consistent if we don't have access to a
wise inner parent it's actually really
good to have a defense mechanis as a
babysitter because they're going to make
sure that our basic needs get met and we
don't die and the way they're going to
do that is they're going to take all of
the information that we have consciously
available to us and they are going to
connect those data points the best way
that they know have and they are
probably going to convince you that no
extra data is needed that they are a
brilliant scientist and that the
conclusion they have come to is the
conclusion because they are 17 years old
and that is how 17-year-olds think so to
kind of follow this metaphor one step
further and then I promise we will get
back to reality imagine that you have a
child whose parents have recently
divorced and this child doesn't really
understand everything that they're
feeling they just know they feel bad
they can't tell you because maybe
they're only 6 or seven years old things
like my sense of stability is being
disrupted I'm worried about my
attachment to one or both parents and
what this divorce is going to do to my
relationship with them I feel scared and
alone and I don't understand my own
feelings they can't communicate that
they just know they feel distressed and
so instead of saying any of that stuff
they might say something more like I
want ice cream give it to me now and the
parent if they are wise and mature
enough understands my child does not
simply want ice cream and that's
probably not why they're throwing a
giant temper tantrum if I don't give it
to them right away probably the reason
why demanding more ice cream lately is
because they are generally disregulated
and they just know that they need some
sort of comfort or they need to know
that I hear them and I see them and I'm
here for them and so a parent who's
aware of the greater picture and who has
access to the data points that their
child is missing about their own
emotional experience is going to be able
to sit down with their child and go you
know what sure here's some ice cream one
time but we're also going to talk
through how this divorce is going to
affect you and we're going to make sure
that your underlying needs for stability
and comfort are being
met but if you have a babysitter who
comes in for one night during this whole
equation they're not going to understand
that the child demanding ice cream is
actually the child being distressed that
their parents are separating what
they're going to hear is this kid wants
ice cream and they're screaming about it
great easy solution I'm going to give
them ice cream so this babysitter is
working with the data points that are
conscious to themselves and the child
and this is exactly how a defense
mechanism operates it forms best
possible solutions around how you ought
to navigate the world based on what is
conscious and not repressed for you so
the more developmental wounding you have
as a child the more blind spots you're
going to develop and the more blind
spots you develop the more neurotic
feelings you're likely to have and the
more neurotic feelings you have have the
more defense mechanisms you are going to
need in order to sooe those feelings of
anxiety that come up which is why we
tend to see more defense mechanisms
among those who have early trauma or
attachment wounding or any other type of
Developmental wounding because all of us
need to have a good enough understanding
of how our inner and outer worlds are
connected in order to make any decisions
about our lives or in order to move
forward in any way we have to feel like
there's a connection between what I'm
thinking and feeling and what is
happening in the world outside of me so
defense mechanisms take all of the
information that's in your conscious
awareness when you find yourself in that
state of anxiety or existential anxiety
because you're feeling things you don't
understand and they're going to go okay
I will make the best possible sense I
can make out of this and I will give you
a strategy for making decisions and
navigating the world even if it is not
the best possible strategy and I will
probably tell you it's the best possible
strategy because based on the data I
have available to me I truly believe
that's the case not knowing of course
that there are data points you don't
have so many of us have many different
babysitters that can and often do come
online to take care of us based on what
type of situation we're up against and
the entire way that our own psychology
is organized but before we get into all
of the nuances around this which we're
going to go more into in the next video
we're just going to start with one
concrete example so that you start
getting a feel for how this process
happens so we always start off with a
blind spot and this part's very
important our blind spots are often the
things that worked really well for us in
our initial environment so a blind spot
is generally not something that is
destructive Point Blank it's often
something that was once very adaptive
for us let's say very early on in life
you developed a blind spot around being
aware of who you like and don't like so
let's say you grew up in a household
where your parents were incredibly
sensitive to rejection by you the child
so the average parent when their child
comes to that age where they start
saying things like I hate you you're
ruining my life I wish I had different
parents they can kind of context that
for themselves and go you know what I'm
dealing with a three-year-old or a
seven-year-old or whatever it is
children are temperamental it is my role
as a parent to keep myself emotionally
regulated when my child says something
like that to me and I understand that
it's not my job to defend myself against
them it's my job to teach them how to
express their feelings while regulating
my own but let's say you had a parent
who wasn't very good at emotional
regulation so if you screamed I hate you
at them maybe they would scream I hate
you too and lock you in your room until
you calm down now in this case what your
system might learn is that it's best for
you to actually tune out the ways in
which you don't like your parent so not
to feel the pain and anger but push it
down but to actually disconnect from the
part of yourself that even makes
judgments about your parent and to
instead Focus as much as you can on the
positive things that you like about your
parent because this is less likely to
get you rejected the problem is that the
part of us that makes judgments and
asserts our Independence against our par
parents is very important for later
discernment and discernment is a crucial
interpersonal skill that we all need to
have knowing who it feels good for us to
be around versus who it feels bad for us
to be around that requires us to check
in with ourselves and go hey how do I
feel when I'm interacting with this
person and then make decisions about
whether or not to continue interacting
with them accordingly but if you have
learned to disconnect from that part of
yourself it's probably going to cause a
lot of problems for you later on in life
so you might find yourself in situations
where you feel chronically uncomfortable
and disregulated around someone on a
physiological level but your conscious
brain is feeding you thoughts of I
really like this person and what's going
to happen now you are now going to have
a neurotic conflict one part of yourself
that is unconscious to you is going to
be experiencing distress but you're not
going to be connecting that distress to
the real situation because in your mind
you're just going to be thinking about
all of the parts of that person you
really like because that's what your
mind is trained to do ignore the
discomfort don't connect it to the fact
that this person is saying or doing
something in particular and just think
about what you like about this person
that's what once kept you safe but is
now causing you a new conflict and so
you might find as you get closer to
someone who might be C ically
disregulated for you you start getting
confused because you feel uncomfortable
around them but you don't know why again
consciously you think that you really
like them and that's all there is to be
known and so probably you're going to
start feeling stressed out like why
can't I understand what's going on here
why do I feel so terrible inside of this
relationship with this person who I
super like and in the absence of that
wise inner parent if you haven't learned
to build that inside of yourself yet a
defend mechanism is going to come onto
the scene and go okay give me all the
data points you have in your conscious
mind and I will help you connect them
and that 17-year-old who is so proud of
their own reasoning might go okay here's
what we're working with I see here that
you really like this person and I see
that you feel very uncomfortable around
them well here's something that I've
learned in my 17 years of life I know
that often when people are uncomfortable
in an interaction it's because one
person dis likes the other but again I
see here on this data point that you've
given me that you like them you have no
problems with them so they must dislike
you and this is how we start the process
of projection and the 17-year-old is
probably going to be really proud of
themselves because they believe they've
figured out the answer to what is going
on here now they may or may not be right
this other person may or may not dislike
you but they have now formed a
hypothesis
that does not negate any of the
conscious facts that they have available
to them about how your inner world so
this discomfort and anxiety that you're
feeling is connected to your outer world
of other people and relationships and
environments that you're in and that in
and of itself is going to feel initially
quite soothing because believing that we
know how our inner and outer world are
connected is very calming even in the
circumstance where we're wrong because
we don't know that we're wrong and
here's where it gets tricky you have now
been handed a hypothesis and what we
want to do when we have a hypothesis is
test it out so you might go okay well if
this person doesn't like me and that's
why I feel so bad around them I'm going
to try taking space from them and seeing
if I feel better once I've taken space
and maybe you do feel better once you've
taken space because in reality it was
you who didn't like them so it does feel
better when you pull back so now it
might seem like your hypothesis was
correct because pulling back really did
make you feel better but you're not
correct about why it happened or maybe
if there's some reason you can't take
space from them your 17-year-old is
going to notice something else maybe
they're going to notice hey when you
brought this person home to meet your
mom your mom seemed to think that you
guys weren't a very good fit and maybe
in reality the reason your mom thought
that was because it was clear to her
that you didn't really like or Vibe with
this other person but you might have
picked up on the fact that your mom
wasn't really supportive of the
relationship so maybe your 17-year-old
is going to go well you like this person
but your mom doesn't want you to be with
them and that's why you feel all of this
weird tension and so now in either case
the defense mechanism of projection is
online so the thing that you are
actually feeling which is that you're
uncomfortable around someone because you
don't like them you are now either
projecting onto them and believing it's
them who is feeling it or you're
projecting it on to another person it's
your mom who doesn't like your
relationship with this person so the
true information which is that somebody
doesn't like somebody else in this
situation is actually online and
available to you so it's kind of like
you're very close to the truth but
you're not nailing the attribution
you're not getting it right when it
comes to who dislikes this other person
so what you've essentially done is a bad
science experiment so I want to remind
us of what kind of the most classic
example of scientific data being misread
an example you frequently see when
people are warning about the dangers of
confusing correlation with causation is
the example that shark attacks and ice
cream sales are highly correlated and
the idea there is of course that people
might look at that data and go okay well
ice cream sales must be causing shark
attacks when in reality there's a third
variable at play hot weather tends to
both drive up ice cream saes and
increase the amount of people who are
going into the ocean which means more
shark attacks but if the piece of data
that's in your blind spot is that hot
weather has an effect on both of those
things you might incorrectly make the
assumption that the ice cream Sals are
causing the shark attacks but it might
actually help you to avoid shark attacks
by going with this information so if you
tell yourself I'm just not going to go
in the water anytime people are buying a
lot of ice cream you actually are at
less risk of getting it attacked by a
shark but you're wrong about why and you
won't find out that you're wrong about
why unless and until you go into the
ocean one day when it's winter and get
attacked and the same is very often true
of our defense mechanisms they kind of
operate based on correlations between
the things that we're consciously aware
of and because those correlations are in
a sense meaningful we're just blind to
the third variable or the many variables
that are actually affecting the thing
that we're correlating to one another we
can get by reasonably well in the world
just by looking at those correlations
that our defense mechanisms are making
so if I know I feel a little bit anxious
around this person but I feel better
when I'm not around them we can still
navigate the world reasonably well by
backing off every time we get the
thought in our minds this person
dislikes me even if we're wrong every
single time right and the reason I
picked this defense mechanism is because
it was once one of my my own when I had
more fearful avoidant patterning I would
tend to pick people to date based on
objective criteria so are they
good-looking do we have similar goals
Without Really checking in on do I like
them do I like how I feel around them
and then if I didn't like how I felt
around them I wouldn't clock that
consciously I would go well they meet
all my criteria so I must like them but
then I would very often start to develop
this sense that they didn't like me and
so I would back off or take space and
then feel better because I was no longer
experiencing the feelings of discomfort
that I would feel around them because I
didn't like them now this is a strategy
that actually allowed me to get out of a
lot of relationships where I was unhappy
without ever knowing that I was unhappy
until I kind of uncovered that blind
spot in my healing work and looked back
over my entire relationship history and
went oh my God but sometimes our defense
mechanisms don't work out so well
because all it takes is one instance of
going up to the other person and going I
know you don't like me or going up to
your mom and going I know you don't want
me to be with this person because you
don't like them and having that person
disagree with you sometimes very
enthusiastically so for that defense
mechanism to kind of blow up in your
face the same way bad science Works some
of the time and other times it causes
giant explosions and so in the next
video we're going to talk about how
those explosions can actually be giant
gifts because they break the illusion
that we're working with and can
potentially uncover our blind spots for
us but sometimes we go a really long
time without ever coming to that moment
of explosion and in that case our
defense mechanisms can actually be
pretty adaptive because a they give us a
way to navigate the world that is not
perfectly accurate but that works well
enough that our lives don't fall apart
and again we're going to go really deep
into that in the next video and B they
take away that existential anxiety
because even if we're wrong about the
connections that we're making we don't
know that we're wrong so we're probably
not feeling that chronic distress of I
have no idea how my inner and outer
worlds are related we think that we do
know and so we can at least rest easy
holding the belief that we understand
how our inner and outer world is
connected again even though on a deeper
sense we're wrong and remembering this
can also help have a little bit more
empathy for people who are really
defended themselves it's not always that
people are trying to not see the truth
it's that when we're working with a lot
of blind spots often undoing our defense
mechanisms means undoing a significant
portion of our worldview that is keeping
our psychology organized enough to help
us continue to interact with the world
in a way that gets at least most of our
basic needs met and so if you think
about it we're highly motivated
unconsciously to to kind of push aside
anything that threatens our defense
mechanisms and their validity because it
would mean having to restructure a
significant portion of our psychology
that we need to keep navigating the
world reasonably well but here's the
kicker if we want to grow into those
wise and reasonable inner adults who are
really good at science we have to first
be willing to fire those 17-year-olds
because they are way too confident and
the confidence they have in their own
reasoning is getting in the way of us
noticing where there are outliers in the
data or where there are data points that
directly conflict with our hypothesis
and if we want to grow into those wise
inner parents it means we have to be
honorable scientists we can't just throw
out the data that doesn't work for us we
have to start looking at the
contradictory clues in our awareness
that suggests the world does not operate
and that our relation relationships with
other people do not operate exactly how
we think they do all of the time in
order to arrive at a more concise and
accurate view of reality and of
ourselves so a defense mechanism is what
happens when we're trying to make the
facts fit the data when it comes to how
our inner and outer worlds are connected
and being a wise inner parent means
keeping the research question of why
we're feeling something that we don't
understand open indefinitely until we
can actually make sense of what's
happening and to be willing to run a lot
of different studies until we're able to
gather enough information to make sense
of things in a coherent way so this is
how we start off the conversation of how
do we undo our defense mechanisms how do
we start getting rid of them and this is
a question that we're going to answer
slowly over the course of this series
because there's a lot that goes into it
but the first thing we want to start
with is just mindfulness around our own
neurotic feelings when we're feeling
something we don't understand stand when
we're feeling something we don't know
how to contain when we're feeling
something that is disrupting our ability
to function instead of going into that
state of panic and going how do I find
any way to connect what's happening in
my inner world to the world outside of
me we can go this is a data point that
there's something I don't understand and
that I have a blind spot somewhere and I
can find ways to keep myself calm and
regulated around the fact that I don't
yet know the answer to this maybe that
means reaching out to friends and loved
ones for co-regulation and support maybe
it means containing the feeling of
anxiety for myself by literally going
I'm going to create an imaginary
container in my mind called I don't know
and I'm going to keep the box of that
container open until I find a solution
or a framing for it that actually feels
comprehensive and accurate instead of
trying to shove this into the first
category where it kind of fits because I
don't know how to sit with the ambiguity
of it and that sounds really simple but
it's actually a very complex skill set
and it's probably going to take a long
time to master it but in the meantime
what we just want to be doing is
practicing mindfulness and staying aware
of when we're feeling neurotic rather
than trying to find an immediate
explanation for what it is that we're
feeling so often some signs that the
feeling we're experiencing is neurotic
which means the feeling is real but part
of why we're feeling it is unconscious
to us or unavailable to our conscious
Minds might be that we are feeling
really obsessive obsessive thoughts and
feelings are often a sign that there's
something that's obscured from our
awareness that is really relevant to
whatever the feeling we're having is
another sign that we might be
experiencing a neurotic feeling is when
we find ourselves getting into the same
types of messes over and over again but
not understanding why so again think
back to those programs that you need in
order to stay functional that you don't
know you need when we don't have a
certain program online what tends to
happen is we run into the same problems
over and over and over again despite the
fact that each time we think we have
solved that problem because the real
solution to the problem lies somewhere
inside of that blind spot and a kind of
variation of this is when we feel
absolutely sure that we have figured out
the solution into a problem but
implementing it doesn't work often
what's happening when that's the case is
that we actually truly are holding a
piece of information that's really
important to solving that problem but
we're also lacking a different piece of
information but if we have a blind spot
over here we're going to think that this
is the whole answer so if we're just
checking our solution over and over and
over again and going I don't get it it's
perfectly internally logically
consistent we might actually be right
about that but it's also incomplete
there's another thing that needs to
happen to balance out this thing in
order for the solution to actually take
hold and this often gets played out in
anxious avoidant Dynamics and in a
future video we're going to go really
deep into how our defenses and our
Neurosis play out in attachment Dynamics
but essentially you very often have
someone who is more avoidant going I
have thought through this situation and
I have the solution and if my anxious
partner would just listen to my solution
and implement it it would actually fix
our relationship things would genuinely
get better and it's not that they're
trying in most cases to be hard-headed
and stubborn it's that they truly think
that they have found the answer and that
if they could just get the other person
on board then everything would get
solved the problem is that the anxious
party might be holding the other piece
of the equation and they might go you
know what I don't even want to talk
Solutions right now because I'm in a lot
of pain and I don't know if I even want
to carry on with this relationship based
on the way that I'm feeling now the
problem is that actually both feelings
and solutions need to be centered and
integrated in order for any conflict
situations to make any progress so in a
secure Partnership if one person's
holding the emotional pain and the other
is holding the Practical or logistical
challenges and solutions the reasonable
thing to do is to put both on the table
and work with both the problem is that
in anxious avoidant Dynamics each
person's blind spot is the part that the
other person is holding so each party is
actually threatened by the other
person's contribution and trying to
knock the person's contribution or what
the other person is aware of off of the
table so that the part that they're
holding can be the only thing on the
table when in reality until both are
integrated you're probably not going to
get to any type of sustainable solution
to the conflict and each one tends to
feel so frustrated in the process
because the avoidant party is over here
going I have checked my logic thousand
times it's rock solid I'm sure I'm right
and their internal logic often actually
is right but it's incomplete same goes
on the anxious side of things the
emotional needs and experiences of both
people absolutely need to be centered
focused on and integrated in order for
the relationship to work so they might
go talk to all of their family and
friends and get unilateral agreement
that getting their partner to take their
feelings seriously is going to help
because it is but acknowledging all of
the feelings without also zooming out
and looking at the relationship from a
more detached lens is also not going to
be sufficient to fix the problem so both
people are right about what they're
holding but not right about the fact
that it's the whole solution so this is
another skill that it takes time to
develop
the skill of noticing when you are right
and yet your logic around a given
situation is incomplete or when your
feelings are valid but your feelings are
not the entire equation but again
getting to those points where it feels
like you should be at the solution but
for some reason you're not are just
another opportunity to notice that you
might be missing data points and that it
might be time to reopen the question of
what's going wrong and be willing to
stay in that state of ambiguity for a
longer period of time until you arrive
at the more accurate explanation rather
than simply insisting that you have the
answer when it's clear based on the fact
that it's not working when you try to
implement it that you don't and this is
another area before we go I just want to
encourage us to have a lot of
self-empathy around because in order to
unpack our defense mechanisms we first
have to be in a place in our lives where
we feel sec Ure enough to do that
because often unpacking a defense
mechanism means uncovering a blind spot
that might actually cause very
significant disruption to our lives and
to our relationships and so there's a
reason why we hold on to these things so
tightly so the first step is not to
uncover every defense mechanism and do
away with the entire structure of
thinking that we're using to govern Our
Lives it's just to start practicing
mindfulness around when we're in that
state of neurosis or of existential
anxiety or when we're in that panicked
state of I don't understand what in my
external world my feelings are connected
to the first step is just noticing that
and understanding that it might mean we
have some research to do now in part two
of this video we're going to go into the
next layer of defense mechanisms which
is that they tend to incur consequences
so when we go out into the world and
start employing our defense mechanisms
once again we're going to sometimes
encounter explosions and we're going to
talk about how we can actually look at
those explosions as gifts and as
opportunities to start doing the hard
work of uncovering our blind spots and
forming more holistic and accurate
systems of understanding ourselves and
other people and the world and how all
of that stuff is actually connected but
this has been a lot for today so I am
going to leave it at that for now as
always any questions questions or
comments that you have feel free to
leave in the comment section below I
love you guys I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again soon
[Music]