hey guys heidi preeb here welcome back
to my channel where we talk about
myers-briggs attachment theory and any
other theory that can help you
understand yourself other people and how
to bridge the gaps between you better so
today i wanted to talk about something
that it occurred to me would make a
really good video i am in the middle of
procrastinating a very large project for
school for those of you who don't know
i'm currently finishing up my master's
degree in attachment theory so i have a
giant project due that i am trying to
put the finishing touches on and i keep
pushing it back one more day one more
day and one more day and if you are a
perceiver in the myers-briggs system
this is probably not an uncommon
experience for you we tend to work more
and more furiously as the deadline
approaches and enfps in particular can
be very guilty of this so there is a
hack a tool that i learned during the
year of my life when i was studying
neuro-linguistic programming which is
basically a field that is kind of
mindfulness on steroids is what i like
to call it the founder of
neuro-linguistic programming who is the
person that i trained under basically
just went to all of the most prominent
psychologists who were on the scene back
in the days when he was developing nlp
and asked them what is the tool you have
that most consistently works with your
clients and then he took those tools and
he assembled this kind of program that
basically allowed people to develop
greater and greater mindfulness
practices to help them understand what
was going on inside their minds and how
to solve their problems faster nlp is
very te in a lot of ways like it's all
about gaining an awareness of how we
think but then using it to solve
problems more effectively i believe that
the founder of the field is an entj and
the tools that i'm going to be
referencing today all come from nlp now
basically what i'm doing here is
combining nlp techniques so mindfulness
tactics that i took from nlp and
applying them to the james clear
principle of knowing when you're going
to get something done so james clear if
you have not heard me talk about him
already is a man who wrote a book called
atomic habits which once again is very
te helps people understand how they can
structure their time more effectively
and i think that it's actually a great
book for enfps because it really takes
into account who you authentically are
as a person and how you can work with
that to get the best results but one of
the things that he says in the book that
i really love is that a lot of the time
it's not that we don't know what we need
to do it's that we don't know when we're
going to do it so when we have a goal a
task a project an assignment that we
know we need to get done
usually we can figure out what the steps
are but the reason why we don't do it
until the last minute if we are
last-minute people is because we don't
actually have a clear idea in our heads
that is concrete about when we're going
to do the thing now this is a lot more
deceptive than it seems because a lot of
us think we know when we're gonna do
something but actually we don't so as an
example let's say i tell myself i'm
going to go to the gym tomorrow and i
might go to sleep thinking tomorrow i'm
definitely going to the gym like i have
a plan right but if i don't know what
exact time i'm going to the gym tomorrow
as well as what time i have to start
getting ready to go to the gym tomorrow
so what time do i have to put on my
shoes grab my car keys go outside start
driving towards the gym it's going to be
very easy for me to accidentally not go
because i'm gonna have a really easy
time losing track of time thinking about
other things telling myself oh yeah i
have a couple hours before dinner i'll
definitely do it as soon as i just check
one more email or watch one more episode
of the show or whatever it is right so
often when we think we're being specific
about when we're going to do something
we're not being specific enough now
here's where nlp comes in nlp is the
study of not what we do not why we do
things but how we do things so nlp is
all about breaking down the sequence of
events that leads to actions inside of
our own minds and figuring out where in
the very specific sequence of thoughts
we go wrong so where we end up pivoting
away from the result we want and
following a different train of thought
and in order to figure out when we're
going to do the things that we want to
do we have to get extremely specific
about every part in that process and
what it will look like to make sure that
we actually end up doing it so i'm going
to walk you through a little bit of a
process try to bring into your mind
something that you need to get done and
use that as the model that you map this
onto as we go through these steps okay
so for myself it's going to be finishing
this essay that i need to hand in by the
end of the week from my course but for
you it can be absolutely anything it can
be a work assignment it could be a
social assignment maybe you have a text
you've been procrastinating answering
for a while it can be anything that you
are stressed about and that you want to
get done okay so here we go step one and
this seems simple but it's actually not
that simple
is visualize when you're going to do
this thing now once again you probably
have kind of a vague idea of when you're
going to do this thing so for example
for me i have this piece of writing due
on friday so i'm like okay i know that
by wednesday i need to be like really in
the trenches with it and devoting all of
my time to it i know that monday and
tuesday of this week i need to be
passively researching and collecting
information about it and i know that by
thursday evening i need to be pretty
much done because i have to hand it in
friday morning but that is not specific
enough okay it sounds specific i think
it's specific it's not because i don't
know when i wake up tomorrow morning how
i am structuring my day yet right i
don't know what the first thought of the
day i'm going to have is i don't know
what my first action of the day is going
to be and that gives my brain a lot of
leeway to get distracted by a lot of
other things so i have to know in
concrete time blocks when exactly i'm
going to do my essay and i also need to
know what do i need to get done before i
start doing my essay to make sure that
it doesn't distract me in the process of
writing so i'm going to do some research
tomorrow is not specific enough what i
need to tell myself is i'm going to be
at my desk fully dressed ready for the
day coffee on my table by 9 a.m and i
have to have my book open to the first
page by 901 am so now i know if i need
to be at my desk with my page open by
901 a.m i have to wake up by at least 8
am which means i have to go to bed by at
least 1 am which means i have to start
winding down by at least 11 p.m tonight
i have to take a shower get settled into
bed whatever it is so that the sequence
of events leads me to a place where by 9
am tomorrow i am already reading my
textbook and figuring out which studies
i need to put into this essay now this
probably seems fairly simple to you but
what probably is not as apparent is how
often you are actually not doing this so
we know that we're going to do something
when we're going to do it if we can map
out the specific sequence of events that
needs to happen all the way back to this
exact moment in order for us to be doing
that thing on the timeline that we want
to be doing it on and it's really
important and nlp is extremely explicit
about this to get a very strong visual
image in your mind of what it's going to
be like in your environment when you're
doing that thing so if i'm at my desk
looking at my page it's 901 am i know
that because i can see my phone beside
me on the desk and it reads 901 i know
exactly how the light is going to be
slanting in through the window i know
which noises i'm going to hear from the
neighboring apartments as people are
getting up to start the day i know
literally what i'm going to be looking
at and when i look up and around me what
i'm going to see hear
feel smell and touch i know exactly
what's going to be going on in my
sensory environment and i can really
picture myself doing it at the specific
time that i would be doing it right so
when i think to myself oh i'm going to
do some research tomorrow that could
mean one of about 10 different things it
could mean i'm going to call someone and
talk out a project it could mean that
i'm going to go to the library and
browse through books it could mean i'm
going to go for a walk and listen to a
story on audible it could mean i'm going
to sit in front of my computer in bed
and i'm going to look through google
scholar it could mean so many different
things so i need to be very specific
about which of those myriad things it
means when i say i'm going to research i
have to pick one of them specifically
decide exactly what time i'm going to do
it at and then really mentally visualize
what it's going to look like at that
specific time when i'm doing it okay
that's step one step two and we already
talked about this a little bit is
bringing the feeling into your body that
you will have when you are doing that
thing so for me i know that i have a
very different feeling in my body when i
am actively writing an essay and i'm
really in a flow state and i'm really
engaged with it versus when i'm sitting
at my desk telling myself i'm writing an
essay but really what i'm doing is
browsing the internet and distracting
myself so we need to be very specific
about tuning into what it feels like in
our bodies when we are actually carrying
out the tasks that we mean to carry out
so for me i know that i get this feeling
when i'm focusing really deeply on a
task of like the rest of the world is
kind of blurred out all i'm seeing is
what's right in front of me ideas are
connecting in my brain i'm often
actually visualizing pieces of writing
kind of up and around my mind and i'm
pulling those kind of pieces of
researcher ideas that i'm thinking about
into my computer onto the page and i can
see myself kind of writing and
backspacing and rewriting and i know
that in my body and i'll be feeling this
energy that kind of starts in my torso
and comes up into my arms and that
allows me to keep my focus really
intently on what i am doing that is
what's happening when i'm actually
engaged in the process of writing now
this is very different than let's say
when i'm sitting at my computer thinking
about oh should i book an airbnb for the
trip that i want to take next month
should i check to see if anyone's
messaged me on any of my social media
sites that's a very kind of relaxed
scattered energy i almost like see
tweets and vacation homes and other
thoughts that i have floating through my
awareness and i don't have that kind of
focused spotlight on what i want to be
doing that's a very different inner
mental experience so we also have to
picture not just what we are doing but
what our inner mental state is like when
we are actually doing the thing that we
want to do to use a different example
let's say you really want to go to the
gym tomorrow feel in your body what it
feels like when you know you are going
to the gym so not when you think you're
going to the gym maybe and you hope
you're going to the gym but when you're
actually like yes i know i'm going to
the gym because i'm actively in my gym
outfit walking towards the door with my
car keys in my hand what thoughts are
you having what feeling is present in
your physical body in those moments
really picture it because that's the
energy that you will be tapping into
when you actually carry this action out
and again use that same process that we
used with the other example so what time
of day is it how is the light slanting
in through the windows what do you see
on your way out the door down the
hallway into your car into the subway
whatever it is what is the visual
process but also the kinesthetic felt
experience of you finally acting on this
thing get really really clear on that
inside of your mind and inside of your
body okay
step number three make sure you are
differentiating between what's a maybe
and what's a definitely so this is a
really interesting one that nlp
personally gave me the biggest kind of
aha moment about when i realized this if
you are a person who identifies as a
little bit indecisive or who sometimes
struggles to make decisions whether
they're big or small in nature it's
often because you don't know whether or
not you are serious about the decision
you can often end up with this feeling
of i don't know if i can trust myself
and nlp actually gives us language for
figuring out when we can trust ourselves
and when we can't and in order to do
that we have to become extremely good at
mindfulness and this specific
mindfulness task is all about figuring
out how you know that you're maybe going
to do something versus how you know
you're definitely going to do something
okay so what we're going to do is tune
into both the mental and physiological
sensations that come along with knowing
versus hoping so let's say i am hoping
that tomorrow i'm going to go for a
two-hour walk where i listen to a book
on audible that i need to finish in
order to write my essay because that's
something that i perceive myself as
needing to get done if i am hoping that
i'm going to do that thing when i think
about it here's what i'm going to
visualize in my mind and if you're not
used to thinking visually that's totally
fine when i started studying nlp i was
like i am not a visual thinker at all
when you ask me to do these tasks or
when the task involves visualizing
things i really struggle but i actually
think that there's just a limitation in
terms of what we mean when we say
visualizing so i was thinking like oh
maybe other people see things in really
explicit bright clear colors and scenes
almost like they're watching a movie it
doesn't have to be like that at all all
you have to do is be kind of aware of
even like which shapes are floating by
in your mind as you're thinking about
things so when i have the feeling of
maybe i'm going to go for a walk
tomorrow and read my book and finish
that part of the research process what i
visualize when i really really pay
attention and this can take some
practice is almost like a rolodex of
scenes flashing past my awareness one of
those scenes is let's say me thinking 2
o'clock p.m and then going for a walk
and listening to my book but another
scene is me thinking 2 o'clock p.m and
then going oh maybe i'll call my friend
maybe i won't go for my walk maybe i'll
still be at home at 2. maybe i'm going
to be working on something else there is
not a solid set grounded vision of what
i'm going to be doing at 2 pm tomorrow
there is kind of a montage of possible
things i could be doing and it's almost
like i'm trying to grab the one that i
want and hope that i'm gonna hold on to
it that's what it feels like for me
internally that's what i visualize
internally when i think about what i
might do or what i hope that i will do
at a given point in time
if i know for sure that i'm doing
something my inner experience is very
different so for example later this week
i know that i have a block of classes
that i need to go to between 8 a.m and
11 30 a.m so when i picture that day i
picture myself waking up i picture
myself sitting down opening my computer
clicking on the zoom link opening up my
class and i picture myself sitting there
until 11 30 a.m with the odd coffee or
bathroom break and when i picture that
day i do not picture any possible
alternatives for what i could be doing
between 8 a.m and 11 30 a.m i have not
come up with a single other alternate
possible plan that i'm even remotely
maintaining because i see a schedule of
my day in my mind where those hours are
blocked off and everything else is a
little bit more movable and changeable
and debatable but those hours are not so
it's almost like picturing a graphic
file where one image is stuck in place
it can't be moved but everything else
around it can be kind of moved and
shaken up and sometimes the things are
almost bouncing off that one thing
that's stationary in place but i know
for sure that there's not an alternative
to this one plan
of course if like someone died or there
was some crazy emergency i'd be able to
move it but i don't actively spend any
time thinking about alternatives because
i am 100 sure that barring an emergency
that is where i will be from 8 a.m to 11
30 a.m on friday and often that is how
we visualize the plans that we're sure
of they are clear they're concise we
think about what we could do around them
but the plan itself feels very solid and
very set and that's how i know that i'm
going to for sure do something i don't
entertain any other ideas about what i
might do with that time i think of that
time as set in stone and everything else
is a little bit more movable or
changeable around it now this might not
be specifically how you visualize the
process of doing something versus not
doing something but it's really worth
spending some time with and really just
pulling into your awareness what's
something you are 100 sure you're gonna
do it can be anything it can be going to
sleep tonight it can be brushing your
teeth before you go to bed it can be a
flight that you know you need to catch
later this week what does it look like
when you picture that thing versus what
does it look like in your mind when you
picture something that you're not yet as
sure of so that could be what you're
gonna eat for dinner two nights from now
it could be a conversation that you're
gonna have later it could be what you're
going to watch on tv when you get home
tonight it could be what you're going to
be doing on june 4th of this year if
you're watching this on or close to june
4th that might not work as well pick a
date further in the future but i really
want you to start observing what it
feels like and what it looks like inside
of your own mind when you're sure about
what you're going to do versus when you
still feel like there are alternate
possibilities because you can save
yourself a lot of time and agony by just
figuring out how to start visualizing
the thing that you hope you'll do or
that you want to do as if it is as solid
as that thing that you know you are
going to do right so if i take that
rolodex of moving plans and i take 2pm
going for a walk listening to my book
and i shove it in my schedule and i
visualize it as if it is as rock solid
and as centered and as concrete and
immovable as the class that i'm going to
go to on friday there is a much better
chance that tomorrow at 2pm i'm going to
be going on that walk listening to my
book and completing the plan that i set
out to complete because i made the
deliberate conscious choice to eliminate
those other possibilities that i didn't
realize until i really thought about it
were constantly flickering through my
mind right that's what's fun about this
once you can get a visualization of your
inner world you can actually start
playing with it and the last step in
this process is try to have an anchor
for what will be happening once this is
done so this can be particularly
important if we do not have a specified
timeline already set up what this helps
us do is get identified with a point in
the future in which this task will be
done and allow ourselves to think
backwards from that person's perspective
about what steps led us there so for
example there is something that i had to
get done this week that was so stressful
for me like a situation that truly
caused me an abnormal amount of stress
basically i had to have a very difficult
conversation with someone that i was
really dreading leading up to it not
because i thought it would go bad but
just because there are some types of
confrontation i do not like having every
single day i told myself for about four
days in a row i'm going to have this
conversation tomorrow every single day i
did not do it finally i called my
closest friend and i said
i'm going to have a difficult
conversation that is probably going to
disregulate me a little bit emotionally
afterwards can you come over at seven
o'clock on wednesday and debrief the
conversation with me and she said yes i
can clear my schedule for wednesday i
can be there at 7 00 pm on wednesday now
i know in my mind there's going to be a
time when this situation is over when i
have already done the thing that i'm
currently now hoping i will do in the
future and i'm allowing myself to think
very concretely about what it's going to
look like literally practically where i
will be what i will be seeing what i
will be hearing what i will be feeling
in my body when this thing is done it'll
be dark if she's coming over at 7 i'm
definitely making dinner so i might be
chopping up vegetables it's supposed to
snow on wednesday evening so i'm
probably going to see some snowflakes
outside of the window and i'll probably
be telling her the story of how the
conversation went and i can tune into my
body and think about what it's going to
feel like when that conversation is over
so sometimes when we're really afraid to
do something in particular or even to
get on board with a task it's often
because we can't picture the experience
of that task being over so we kind of
feel like once i start doing this thing
it's going to last forever so once i
start writing my essay if i don't know
when i'm handing it in i'm just going to
feel like in some stupid part of my
brain like once i start writing that
essay i will always be writing that
essay and the experience will never end
once i go into that difficult
conversation i will always be having
that difficult conversation and it will
never end it's really important to be
very very associated with the feeling we
will have and the experience we will be
experiencing when the thing that we need
to do is over
so that gives us a future anchor that we
can orient ourselves towards and now
work backwards from so if my friend is
coming over at 7 pm on wednesday that
means that i need to have this
conversation with this other person by
at the latest wednesday afternoon
because i'm going to need to get home
get some groceries set up for when my
friend comes over make sure that i have
time to change and relax a little bit
and clean up my house a little now i
have a much more solid timeline because
by let's say 3pm i know that i have to
be having this conversation with this
other person but what's really cool
about this is that often just thinking
about what it's going to be like in the
afterwards allows our anxiety to really
ease up because we don't often think
again about what it's going to feel like
once the scary thing is done once the
thing that we are procrastinating is
over we might kind of dissociate and
start envisioning a magical future where
the thing is well in the past but we
rarely think about when it is 9 a.m and
i have just handed my essay in how will
i feel then what will i be seeing
experiencing feeling touching at that
moment and then we can work backwards to
what steps led us to that place by first
visualizing the end point and this is by
the way also a really good anxiety
reduction tactic because when we have
anxiety we're often kind of getting
stuck on possible thoughts about the
future so for example i have to fly
later this week i hate flying i fly
often but i absolutely hate it and one
of my earliest aha moments with nlp was
realizing that i have far less anxiety
like at least 50 percent less anxiety
getting into an airplane if i know what
the arrivals hall looks like when i get
off the airplane so when i'm flying home
to toronto where i live i'm much less
nervous than if i'm flying to a country
i've never been before because i can
think about what it's like when i arrive
in toronto and so as an enfp my
introverted sensing function has an
internal map of what's going to happen
and so it can start self-regulating
around that and if you don't have an
internal map of what something is going
to look and feel like when you arrive
there you can help yourself as much as
possible by let's say googling what it
might look like at that arrivals hall or
if you are trying to hand in an
assignment or hand in a project
literally you can visualize yourself
let's say emailing your client and
saying here's the project here's what i
need from you next attaching the file
and sending it and then noticing what
you're going to feel in your body as
soon as you've done that right so get
really clear on what it's going to look
like when the thing that you are anxious
about is done and if it feels too big so
for example for me it actually feels too
big to picture myself handing in my
essay what i need to picture is
finishing smaller parts of it so what's
it going to feel like when i've finished
the first paragraph what's it gonna feel
like when i have mapped out the
structure what's it gonna feel like when
i am doing my bibliography think about
it step by step if you have too much
anxiety around looking at the whole
picture so last thing before i let you
go on this process is that this is not
meant to be about rigidly keeping
yourself stuck in some routine so let's
say something starts taking a little bit
longer than you meant for it to that's
totally okay it's just about being aware
of what's happening inside your brain
and in which areas your thoughts are
working for you versus against you and
how you can start capitalizing on your
ability to visualize your future in
order to start working it more to your
advantage what this process helps us
with as perceivers who can sometimes
struggle to structure our time is no
concretely unambiguously when things are
going to happen and i promise you that
if you struggle to get things done in a
timely fashion this is probably a much
bigger part of the problem than you
think it is right so you can take your
power back in at least this one area
because if i know anything about our
type it is once we get going once we're
in that flow state we are golden we just
have to figure out how to initiate that
action in the first place and once we
get that started we're usually pretty
golden at the end of this video i'm
realizing this hella applies to infps as
well maybe even slightly more so so
maybe i'll throw that into the video
title on that note if you are an enfp or
an infp personality type i run six-week
enfp and infp soul bootcamp programs
where you get virtual lessons delivered
to your inbox helping you manage your
natural energy in a much more authentic
way so that you can get stuff done that
you actually care about on your own
terms rather than trying to kind of
constantly react to the external demands
of your environment so it is a lot of
stuff similar to this video and nlp is
infused throughout the course and it
gives you a lot of hacks that can help
you work with your natural energy but
anyways let me know in the comments what
you think of this hack let me know any
aha moments that you're having if you're
trying to apply it to yourself as always
i love you guys i hope you're taking
care of yourselves and i will see you
back here again really soon
[Music]
you