hey guys heidi preeb here welcome to my
channel if you are new we talk about all
things personality and developmental
psychology on this channel so we talk
about any system of self-understanding
that helps you to make sense of who you
are and the way that you show up in the
world as well as how you can make sense
of the way other people show up in the
world so today i'm talking about a
system that was very heavily requested
so i think that i mentioned this system
really briefly in passing in another
video and i got all of these comments
that were like i want to hear about the
four tendencies tell me what this system
is so today we are going to be talking
about the four tendencies which is a
system developed by a woman named
gretchen rubin and she gives you the
entire layout of this system in her book
the four tendencies which unfortunately
i do not physically have on me i have it
on audible but it is a fantastic book
it's a super easy read and it gives you
a lot of insight about motivation so
both how we motivate ourselves and how
other people motivate themselves and
what keeps us engaged in the goals or
the things that we want to do versus
what's likely to keep us off track so i
think that i was talking about this in a
video about enfps which is one of the
personality types in the myers-briggs
system and i've really noticed that
within certain personality types so
whether that's enfp intj estj whatever
it is there can be a lot of variation in
terms of what motivates people and i
think that people try to chalk up
motivation to personality types
independently but i think that the four
tenancies really come into play here and
they can actually account for a lot of
the differences within a certain type in
terms of how people are showing up and
honoring or failing to honor their
commitments so today i'm just going to
briefly go over what the four tendencies
are so you can start to get an idea of
which one might be your preferred style
and how you can work with yourself
better with that information but again
i'm gonna redirect you back to gretchen
rubin and her work and her book because
it explains it in much more detail if
this interests you so make sure you're
checking that out so what the four
tendencies looks at is how we respond to
expectations so the four categories that
you might fall into are upholder obliger
questioner and rebel so the upholder
style meets both inner and outer
expectations so what that means is that
this type takes very seriously both the
commitments that they make to themselves
and the commitments that they make to
other people and they're really diligent
about following through on both
which might seem like either a great
deal or a terrible deal depending on how
you're looking at the system but i
believe that gretchen rubin herself said
that this is her tendency so she kind of
had a big aha moment which led her to
developing this system when she realized
that that was not how everyone else
operated so upholders like to have
really clear expectations about what's
expected for them and they also create
really clear expectations for themselves
when it comes to their own goals and
then they're naturally motivated to
follow through on their commitments once
they've made them now this does not mean
that upholders are just going to blindly
do whatever is asked of them no person
has the capacity to follow through that
hard it actually means that they're
going to take a lot of care in picking
out which commitments they take on
because they know that once they've
committed to something they are going to
see it through so often they can be
actually quite analytical and quite
creative when it comes to figuring out
which projects are going to be worth
their time which goals they want to
follow through on and who they want to
collaborate with on these different
goals and projects so i think that if
you're coming from kind of the other
side of the system which we will get to
you might look at the upholder tendency
to follow through on as many of their
commitments as humanly possible as kind
of being rigid and like they don't have
any creativity they can't really decide
on things they just kind of have to do
the things they said they do for the
sake of doing them but actually the
opposite is kind of true like if this is
your own preferred tendency you actually
feel a sense of freedom through
following through on your commitments
because you know anything that i decide
on and any goal that i choose to pursue
i'm probably going to see it through to
the end and that feels very exciting
right that's a pretty autonomous place
to be coming from and i would imagine
there's also a pretty strong sense of
self-esteem that develops through
knowing that you're a person who other
people can rely on right because once
you make a commitment to someone else
you intend to follow through on that so
that sense of being able to live up to
the promises that you make both to
yourself and other people is quite
liberating for this type right but where
they often get very frustrated is in the
realm of dealing with other people
because it can take the upholder quite a
bit of time if ever to realize that
everyone does not operate the way they
do so when someone else agrees to meet
an expectation they're not necessarily
going to be as diligent about following
through on it as the upholder is and
until they start being aware of these
differences it can actually be very
confusing i think for upholders to kind
of go okay well why are other people not
taking their commitment seriously what
is it are the expectations not clear
enough are they lacking information and
they don't always understand that other
people are just motivated very
differently than they are which probably
kind of naturally leads us to our next
type so the next tendency in the four
tenancy system that we're going to talk
about is the obliger so the obliger
meets outer expectations but resists
inner expectations so these are often
people who really need external
accountability in order to complete
their goals because if they're left to
their own devices they're not
necessarily going to feel a natural
sense of consistent motivation to hold
themselves accountable to the decisions
that they've made so these are the
people who might really struggle if
let's say they're completely
self-employed and they don't really have
anyone to answer to it might be people
who really struggle to meet a goal if
they haven't made that goal public or
they don't have other people who are
kind of holding them accountable to
working towards it and if this is the
way that you operate it's really
important to point out that there's
nothing wrong with this right it's not
that this is a better or worse way to
approach goal setting it's just that
it's really helpful to be aware of this
so if this is the category that you fall
into you probably just want to make sure
that when you're setting goals when
you're trying to figure out what kind of
work you want to do or what
collaborations you take on you're going
to want to make sure that you're setting
yourself up for success by making those
goals public by making sure you have
people you're answering to you have
deadlines set for you that are external
because if you're doing all of that work
on your own behalf you're probably going
to be less motivated to meet those
targets so i think that the judgment
that probably gets projected onto this
type quite a bit is that they are people
pleasers and i think there can be an
element of that to the obliger right but
it doesn't necessarily mean that they're
people pleasers they might not be doing
this for the approval of other people
they might just really find it easier
when other people are providing the
structure for them because maybe they
don't like the experience of structuring
their own choices right i think a
certain number of perceivers would fall
into that category right where they just
want someone else to do the work of
structuring things for them and then
they'll show up and do what's expected
of them so in some cases i think it's
just a matter of outsourcing what you
don't like but in other cases there
definitely can be obligers who are
people pleasers and it's important to
note that if someone is taking advantage
of an obliger's kind of people-pleasing
tendency gretchen rubin has this concept
of obliger rebellion where suddenly they
will be no longer following through on
any commitments for that person there
may even be some spiteful sabotage
involved because if they entered into a
certain agreement in good faith
believing that someone had their best
interests at heart and vice versa and
then found out that that wasn't true
they will quite confidently assert
themselves in many cases and absolutely
refuse to follow through on that
commitment right so this is not a blind
adherence to other people's expectations
it's more about recognizing that they
are not the ones who prefer to determine
the structure of their own goals and so
in many cases they need to find either
institutions they can work for where the
structure is already provided the
deadlines are already laid out and it's
just their role to show up and do the
work around that or it's their job to
figure out that if they are going to be
let's say self-employed or if they are
setting a personal goal for themselves
their best chance at achieving that goal
is to make it very public and to get
other people on board with it so that
they've now kind of set themselves up
for success because they've now made a
commitment to something outside of
themselves and that is going to be much
more naturally motivating for this style
than just trying to stick to a quiet
internal commitment
and it is funny because i think that
this advice of like make your goals
public and have external structure is so
commonplace that i think a lot of people
might think like doesn't everybody work
best that way but you'll see as we go on
that for some people having a standard
that they're expected to be met is
actually demotivating for them so that
doesn't completely but in some respects
leads us to our next type that we're
going to talk about which is the
questioner so the questioner in the four
tenancy system resists outer
expectations and meets inner
expectations so the questioner basically
is really comfortable setting rules and
following goals that they set for
themselves and they're uninterested in
meeting other people's expectations for
the sake of meeting other people's
expectations and that part's really
important right so it's not that the
questioner can't be counted on for
anything it's not that they're going to
flake out of all external commitments is
that they are very critical about which
goals they're gonna set and their goals
have to make sense for them in order for
them to feel comfortable completing them
but once they have made a decision to
complete a goal they are incredibly
reliable as long as the decision came
from them so just to disclose my own
bias here this is my own tenancy in the
four tenancy system and i think that
when we talk about myers-briggs because
i make a lot of enfp content i get a lot
of questions that are like how do i stay
accountable to myself how do i complete
my goals how do i follow through once
i've made a decision and i always read
those and i'm like what are you talking
about like enfps are quite good at doing
all of those things and then i realized
that no it's actually the four
tendencies at play here so i naturally
follow through on my own commitments
because i'm a questioner and i almost
compulsively have to do that like if i
make a commitment to myself come heller
high water i will be seeing that
commitment through as long as i properly
decided on it and the decision making
process can take a really long time the
information gathering process about
which decision i'm going to make often
spans over a period of anywhere from
weeks to years but once i decide i'm
going in a particular direction i'm
going there and it's going to take
something really major for me to get off
track but i think i've noticed based on
a lot of the comments that i've gotten
that a lot of enfps fall into the either
obliger or rebel categories we're going
to talk about the rebel next so you have
to be aware of multiple different
systems sometimes in order to fully make
sense of yourself and this is such an
important one so the questionnaire can
take an incredible period of time
sometimes to really figure out what they
want to do based on what makes sense to
them internally but once they decide on
that they will see it through and the
cool thing about this is that this can
extend kind of accidentally to the way
that they show up in relationships as
well and that's a great thing because
no they're not an obliger they're not
necessarily going to meet other people's
expectations for the sake of meeting
other people's expectations but if a
questionnaire decides let's say it's a
principle of mine it's a decision i've
made to let's say always be responsive
to my partner's emotional needs or to
always show up at work on time and meet
my work expectations then that will
become kind of accidentally an external
expectation that they consistently meet
because they have internalized a
principle around it if that makes sense
now the difference here is that if that
stops making sense to them for some
reason they are going to be less likely
to follow through on that external
accountability but again they would have
to have a good reason and they would
have to see their principle be violated
in some way in order for that to be the
case so dealing with questioners can
kind of be annoying to many people
because it's kind of like dealing with a
seven-year-old in many ways like they
look at everything through the lens of
well why would we do it that way and not
this way and they really have to figure
out what makes sense to them in order
for them to feel committed to a certain
course of action which again if you're
working with them or something like that
can be frustrating because it can feel
like they're slowing the process down
but you can also rest assured that once
they figure out what the best course of
action is they really have thought
through all possible courses of action
and they will be very committed to
following through on the one that they
have reasoned makes the most sense so
you can also kind of look at this
through the lens of who you're hiring
for certain jobs like you definitely
don't want a questioner in a position
where you just kind of need someone to
follow orders and do a lot of different
tasks that it's not really important for
them to think through right a
questionnaire might be better at being
let's say self-employed where they get
to call all the shots and make all their
own decisions because they're naturally
motivated to follow through on the
decisions that they made for themselves
and it might actually feel a bit painful
to them to follow through on
expectations for someone else that they
just don't think makes any sense so a
lot of this is just about figuring out
how to make our lives as easy as
possible right by setting up our
environments in such a way that our
natural tendency is able to thrive and
the last style here which i think that a
lot of perceivers in the myers-briggs
system might fall into is the rebel
tendency so the rebel resists outer
expectations and resists inner
expectations i actually think the rebels
kind of not given enough credit in some
cases at least when i hear people
discussing this system because they're
kind of looked at as like the style that
doesn't get stuff done that's unreliable
but i think that the rebel is a one of
the most creative types in the system
because they don't do anything that does
not have a point to it and that leads
them into some very interesting paths in
life
and b they bring this kind of zest to
everything they do so if you have a
rebel tendency you are not going to meet
other people's expectations just because
they told you to you're also not going
to meet your own expectations just
because you told you to right but this
doesn't mean that the things you're
doing are irrational if anything in an
interesting way the rebel tendency is
kind of calculating what makes the most
sense and what's the most rational in
every single moment so the questioner is
kind of looked at as the type that
really calculates their decisions and
figures out what's going to work long
term but then once the questioner gets
going and once they decide on a given
course of action sometimes they will
follow through on it even in a case
where it stops making sense but because
they've made that commitment they just
do something because they said they
would whereas with the rebel it's kind
of like as soon as something stops
making sense that's immediately when
they stop doing it and this has obvious
pros and cons to it but i just think the
rebel's not given enough credit
sometimes and the really fun thing about
this type is that they thrive at doing
things they are not supposed to do so a
rebel is never as productive as they are
like 24 hours after the deadline is
passed right they are never as creative
as they are when someone tells them you
can't do this there is this kind of a
childlike and i say that in truly the
most intelligent form of the word
enthusiasm and curiosity that they bring
to life that is kind of unbounded by
conventional rules and agreements right
it's like they look at every situation
through fresh eyes and a lot of the time
what they need in order to be productive
is extreme pressure right like this has
to get done the next 24 hours and in
that pressure cooker they absolutely
thrive and that is a really important
style to have in the world right not
everything that gets done should be done
slowly over a long period of time there
is immense benefit from people who can
work well under pressure so a lot of
rebels in order to get stuff done learn
that they kind of have to bet against
themselves or other people like they
have to look at something that is always
being done in a certain way and go i bet
i could do that differently in a better
way and that will feel very motivating
to them so they love figuring out kind
of the hacks and shortcuts not because
they're lazy but because they're
actually motivated by thinking
creatively in that respect and i think
that in her book gretchen rubin also
mentions that people sometimes try to
use reverse psychology on rebels but
that can backfire because they might
deliberately sabotage your project if
they catch on to that because they
really do not like being manipulated so
can this be a challenge in work
environments definitely but if you are a
rebel and you can find a way to
structure your life in such a way that
you have autonomy over the choices that
you're making and also you can create
kind of fun challenges for yourself in
the work that you're doing that is how
you're going to produce your most
creative and inventive work and those
are the categories that the rebel shines
in so i would guess that you have a lot
of people in creative fields who have
the rebel tendency um last thing to note
is that you have generally a primary and
a secondary tendency in this system so
if you see yourself in one or more of
these styles that's really common most
of us have one that we default to and
then another one where under pressure or
in certain environments we can lean on a
little bit more so i have questioner as
my main and then rebel is my secondary
so let me know in the comments which of
these styles you guys are identifying
with i'd actually be curious if you know
what your myers-briggs type is and which
of the four tendencies styles you
identify with it'd be super interesting
to see if there's like any correlations
or any consistencies popping up and as
per usual i love you guys i hope you're
taking care of yourselves and i will see
you back here again soon
[Music]