hey guys I'm Heidi prev welcome back to
my Channel or welcome if this is your
first time here today on this channel we
are talking about how to start shedding
our inauthentic selves or some of the
personas or social masks that we have
become very used to wearing and that
have become deeply ingrained into our
own self-concept in order to start
showing up more as our authentic selves
and I want to be clear that this is not
a one-step solution this is an ongoing
process that most of us will be working
with in some capacity for the majority
of our lives there are always going to
be situations that come up that cause us
to put pressure on ourselves to behave
in certain ways that might not be the
most authentic to us but what I want to
tackle specifically today is the idea of
someone who has a shame bound identity
so last week I put out a video called
toxic shame what it is and how to heal
from it and in that video we talk about
what it feels like to have developed a
social Persona that is actually quite
different from who you are at your core
because you have a deep belief that who
you are at your core is shameful and
would not be accepted or loved if anyone
were to truly see you for who you were
and so the very specific I guess point
in the healing process that I'm trying
to pinpoint here is the point at which
you may have realized that to a
significant extent you have a
shame-bound Identity or that very large
parts of who you are and the way that
you show up in the world are inauthentic
because you're trying to keep the world
away from certain parts of yourself that
you consider particularly shameful so
this video is for anyone who is
recognizing that to be something that
they are struggling with but who doesn't
yet know exactly what to do about it I
want to emphasize again when we develop
shame-bound identities when we believe
that huge part parts of ourselves that
are integral to who we are as people are
things we have to hide away from the
rest of the world that causes us to
develop a very prominent and pervasive
social mask so this isn't just about
being overly polite in a few situations
or about not standing up for ourselves
every once in a while this is about
showing up in the world largely as a
person who does not reflect the you who
you are on the inside and it can be very
difficult to let go of those types of
identities because we are often
perpetuating them unconsciously so in
the world of attachment Theory we talk a
lot about the procedural memory system
so this is the memory system that
remembers things like how to ride a bike
or play a piano there are certain things
that kind of get into our bones that we
do without thinking about and a lot of
the ways in which we interact with other
people particularly in situations where
we feel a little bit threatened and
which doesn't mean that there's danger
present it could just mean we're meeting
new people for the first time when we
feel a little bit on guard well often
without realizing it switch quickly into
operating from a place of procedural
memory around other people so there are
certain ways that from a young age we
have learned to hold ourselves to
approach other people to act and behave
in response to people that we are
actually not consciously thinking about
a lot of communication actually happens
without our conscious awareness we are
not always conscious of let's say the
messages that our bodies are giving off
to other people so a lot of this process
is actually going to be about making
ourselves aware of how we're coming
across differently than how we feel on
the inside and what we can do moment to
moment over the course of the rest of
our lives to start showing up more
authentically and aligning our inner and
outer worlds so the first step in this
process is accepting to yourself that
the real you has always been inside of
you and exists inside of you at this
exact moment
so what I see quite a bit of the time
when people start stepping into an
awareness that they have been living
inauthentically is they'll start to
think of their authentic selves as this
version of them that exists in the
future
so okay I recognize that I've been
operating from a very strong social mask
for most of my life
and I have an idea of the kind of person
that I want to be and maybe the kind of
person I want to be has a totally
different life than me maybe I'm
imagining a version of myself who two
years from now is in school taking a
course that I wish I would have taken 10
years ago maybe this true authentic
version of me looks different acts
different has a different social group
works on entirely different projects but
it's important to keep in mind that that
future version of ourselves were
imagining is not a different self it is
just a self who is doing actions that
are more aligned with our inner world
but those actions are not the core of
who we are okay the core of who we are
is the person who is eliciting the
thoughts about those actions so the
person in there who is imagining all of
those things and who is able to get an
idea of who your authentic self is that
is your authentic self and that is a
person who exists whether you take
actions that are in alignment with them
or not which means that person has
always been inside of you and they're
inside of you this very moment your
authentic self is just the true thoughts
and feelings that you have about
whatever is happening and so the first
process of aligning yourself with that
authentic self is just opening a direct
line of communication between you and
that deeper more authentic version of
yourself who has their own thoughts
responses and feelings about everything
that you are doing
so if you really don't like the job
you're in and you're starting to wake up
to this idea my authentic self would not
do this job you don't have to quit
tomorrow that might not be financially
feasible right you just have to start a
dialogue with that authentic part of
yourself that gives you more context
about what it is that you do and don't
like obviously there's something that's
working for you within the situation you
have chosen and your authentic self
probably has an idea of what that is so
let them talk to you just see if you can
be a little bit more in observer mode of
your own mind and your own responses
when do I feel really energized and
engaged at my work and when do I feel
really drained or angry or resistant and
instead of trying to change those
feelings or instead of escaping into a
fantasy about things being different
what if I were just really present with
all of them and just observed them and
notice them that is you being in your
authentic self you don't have to quit
your job and go travel the world the
first day that you decide to start
getting in better touch with yourself
you just have to notice what does it
actually feel like if I stay present
with myself when I'm in these situations
what are my authentic responses to the
life that I currently have and sometimes
what comes up is going to be pain that
you feel like you can't express your
actual self in those situations and
noticing and logging that pain is all
just a part of this process which is
step one the process of recognizing that
your authentic self does not exist in
the future they exist in the present
moment and they always have and your
only job at first is to get in touch
with them and start listening to what
they are telling you step two in this
process this is a very tricky one but in
my opinion maybe the most important step
notice the ways in which you routinely
detach from your authentic self in order
to keep them safe so where are you
dissociating numbing out detaching from
your true emotional state and ask
yourself in those moments if I were to
not numb out what would I be feeling
instead and I'm going to suggest
something that's a little bit
unconventional here so I think that
there are a lot of things that many of
us do that we do to numb out so that
could be watching four hours of TV at
night that could be eating a meal or a
dessert we're not really hungry for that
could mean using substances of any sort
to shift our mental state away from an
unpleasant Sensation that we have in the
present
and I think that for many of us we get
so caught up on the behavior that we
don't want to do
I don't want to overeat I don't want to
drink I don't want to complain or vent
as much as I do that we lose sight of
what's underlying all of that and what's
underlying all of that is the real
problem that needs to be tackled and I
want to be clear here there are many
things people use to numb out their true
emotional states that can be physically
harmful so what I am not saying here is
if you have an addiction to some sort of
substance that is putting your health at
risk ignore that addiction and don't get
help for it if you are struggling with
an addiction I highly advise you to get
help that specifically targets that
addiction whether that is a 12-step
program whether that is a Therapy
Program whatever it is that you feel
like is going to help you return to
physical well-being I highly recommend
that being said if you do not feel as
though the addiction to the substance or
to the behavior or the thought pattern
that you use to numb out is threatening
your life but you find yourself in kind
of an ongoing self-struggle around
whether or not to engage in that
behavior something that has worked well
for me is telling myself I can do this
Behavior I can have a couple drinks I
can overeat one night I can watch 10
episodes of a TV show and numb out but I
have to the next day or whenever I feel
capable of returning to the situation
mentally I have to process what it was
that I was avoiding in that moment so if
I'm feeling really angry and overwhelmed
and I decide in this moment I'm going to
deal with this by having a drink or by
having a dessert or whatever it is that
I use to numb out I'm not going to have
the whole argument with myself in my
head of oh I shouldn't eat or drink so
much I'm just gonna do the thing that I
feel like I need to do in the moment but
I am not going to allow myself to end
there after I have the drink after I eat
the food after whatever it is that I do
to numb out I'm going to revisit what it
was that triggered me to want to do that
thing and I'm going to sit with that
emotion until I have processed it did I
go out and get drunk last night because
I was feeling really ashamed of
something okay it's time to sit down
with that shame really pull it into my
body and be present with it am I
avoiding a conversation with someone
that I think is pretty important because
I'm angry and I don't want to express
that anger okay if I avoided that
conversation I later have to sit with
myself and really pull that anger into
my body and listen to what it is telling
me my true authentic self which includes
my true feelings my true responses to
situations my true judgments and
opinions about things they don't go away
when I numb them out they just
permanently get put on the back burner
so by figuring out which things I'm
putting on the back burner in those
moments and forcing myself once the
moment has passed to bring those things
back up to the front burner is going to
help me learn that there's not an escape
from this thing permanently and I find
that form myself the longer I use this
process for the more I find myself
wanting to skip the first step if I know
that I can go out and do something that
numbs the feeling I'm feeling but later
I'm going to have to feel it anyways it
starts to feel a lot more convenient to
just do the feeling in the present
moment my body starts to learn okay I'm
not giving myself an out so I might as
well just get it over with faster and
what this does over a long period of
time is that it teaches ourselves that
none of our emotions are that scary or
intolerable
sometimes in the moment we might be
freaked out we might be triggered we
might not feel capable of really sitting
down with ourselves and being present
with whatever it is that we're feeling
but in the long run we learn if I can
approach things from a more regulated
State and I find that no feeling is
truly as scary as I thought it was in
the moment maybe it's actually okay to
feel those things in the moment
maybe my body doesn't need to freak out
and overreact every time I feel a little
bit angry a little bit ashamed whatever
it is and the more we realize that and
the more we're able to be present with
the feelings we're feeling in the moment
that we're feeling them the more
integrated we become but it's okay if
it's a little bit of a process to get to
that place step number three for living
in a more authentic way and this one
sounds like a bit of a no-brainer but
honestly it took me a very long time to
figure this one out is start putting
yourself in situations that feel easy
and naturally aligned with who your
authentic self is so I remember when I
was a teenager I was a very wanderlusty
teen like I wanted to get out and
explore and see the world and As I Grew
into a young adult and went to
University and then started working my
first job I quite often felt like where
are all the people who are like me like
I want to go meet the people who share
my same passions and drives and
Curiosities and interests and one day it
occurred to me the people who are like
me are probably out in the world doing
all the things that I want to be doing
but that I'm too afraid to do and so I
started prioritizing traveling and
getting out and seeing the world and
working three jobs as I put myself
through school to make sure I can make
all of that happen and I started finding
the more I traveled at that time in my
life the more I found it easy to express
who I authentically was because I was
putting myself in situations that were a
natural extension of who I was and what
was going on for me on the inside
and I want to be clear that this is
likely to change over the course of your
life there came a time after about half
a decade of being a digital Nomad that I
realized I actually need to start
putting myself in rooms with people who
don't want to travel all the time
anymore now an extension of my authentic
self is someone who is a lot more
centered and grounded and self-aware and
I need to be putting myself in rooms
with people who reflect those values
more so than the values of curiosity and
expansion and exploration which were my
driving force for a period of time but
the time has changed but the important
part is recognizing what traits or
ideals feel like a natural extension of
you at a given point in time and then
trying as much as you are able to start
building an environment for yourself
where those things are the social norm
and so if you're someone who has spent a
lot of their life feeling really not
aligned or even deeply in touch with
your authentic self a good question to
start asking yourself might just be what
would someone like me be doing
if there were a version of me that I
know I am at this point a little bit too
cautious or nervous or unsure of to
fully Express if I can imagine that
version of me as almost a separate
person who is not at all afraid to go
live the life that they want to live
what would that person be doing where
would they be when they woke up in the
morning how would they plan their day
what events would they attend which
types of friend groups would they have
and the clearer an idea you can get of
the kind of person in authentic version
of you would be and what they would be
out doing in the world if they were an
entity who is separate from you the
better an idea you're going to start
forming of which types of environments
you want to eventually aim to put
yourself in more and more long term in
order to make it easy on yourself to
express who you authentically are
because it really does matter right I
think that there can be this idea people
have where it's like if I'm just
authentic and if I'm myself that and I
can be the same me everywhere I go
kind of like there's an element of Truth
to that for sure but there are also
always going to be people and
environments and circumstances that are
better able to mirror you back to you
accurately and it's almost always going
to feel better to be in those
environments most of the time than it is
to be in an environment where you're
working against the grain and always
having to work a little bit extra to
make yourself heard understood whatever
it is and again this is a long-term
solution it doesn't happen in one day
but developing an overall growing
awareness of which types of environments
feel more you is going to help
tremendously in the long run as you can
start to find subtle opportunities that
get you moving in the direction of those
types of environments step number four
in the process of shedding the
inauthentic version of yourself and
stepping more into the authentic version
is allow yourself the gift of feeling
discomfort
I think that for most of us the places
where our social masks come on the most
strongly and the most instinctually are
situations in which we feel
uncomfortable now I want to be clear
there are times when it's not the wrong
choice to wear a social mask
particularly if we're in an environment
where it's not safe for us to be
particularly open and vulnerable
but I think that a lot of the time the
reason we immediately jump into our
false personas is because we don't want
to feel awkward we are terrified of
feeling awkward however awkwardness is a
very natural response to situations that
we're not feeling aligned with and also
it can be present in situations that are
wonderful and growing but most of us
when we really check in with ourselves
know the difference so I'll give an
example here it's only in really the
last year Loosely of my life that I've
decided I am going to approach dating
from a place of authenticity so I have a
tendency when I am on let's say a first
date to want to keep the energy really
high to want to make the other person
feel really good and like I'm really
interested in what they're saying even
if I personally feel like I have no
interest in or chemistry with this
person and where that has often led me
in the past is directly into a lot of
situations where I will walk away from
the date with this person who thinks
that I really like them and who might be
really excited to have a second date
because they think we got along super
well well I'm over here feeling like
well I had nothing in common with that
person and I have no interest in seeing
them again and then I'm creating a huge
discrepancy between my authentic self
and my reality and that becomes really
difficult to bridge because now I have
to find a way to explain to this person
I actually don't want to go on a second
date even though it probably felt to you
like our first date went phenomenally
and the bigger the Gap is between the
reality of what we're thinking and
feeling and how we're behaving the more
difficult communication becomes right
however if I go on a date and when I
feel awkward I just let it be a little
bit awkward I don't rush in to savior
myself from the situation or to save
you're the other person from the
situation I let there be reasonable
silences and gaps in the conversation I
don't pretend to agree with things I
actually don't agree with now the ways
in which we're incompatible are going to
be right there on the surface they're
going to be felt within the interaction
and I'm not saying throw politeness out
the window or anything like that but I'm
saying notice the moments where you want
to rush in with a very false energy
and in those moments stop yourself and
ask yourself how can I stay closer to my
authentic reaction in this moment while
still being respectful of the other
person and if you're able to do that
then you're able to walk away from
interactions feeling like if there was
high energy and excitement and great
Vibes it's because I actually connected
with them and if there were long pauses
and low energy and big awkward gaps in
conversation at least now we're probably
both on the same page in recognizing
that this just isn't the best fit and it
doesn't mean there's something wrong
with either of us we just aren't
necessarily the right people for each
other and this could be the case in
dating relationships it could be the
case in friendships it can be the case
in family Dynamics it can be the case at
work anytime you are allowing yourself
the gift of being a little bit
uncomfortable without playing savior to
the situation you're allowing your
authentic self to exist in the real
world and so you are not creating this
giant gap between what's true and how
you're acting air go it gets a lot
easier to communicate authentically
because the Gap is no longer humongous
so this is a gift that you're giving
yourself and other people because it's
just so much less confusing than the
alternative in Step number five when it
comes to living from a more authentic
and embodied sense of cell is staying
present with yourself in the moments
that are difficult
if you are allowing yourself to move
into those spaces where things feel
awkward and uncomfortable and maybe wear
conflicts that you would have otherwise
avoided are getting handled head on and
directly it's highly likely that you're
going to start feeling some difficult
emotions that you normally avoid through
covering up anything negative that might
come up interpersonally and in those
moments when we feel those things that
awkwardness that maybe brings up
feelings of Shame
or anxiety or loneliness
those are the moments where we need to
stay the most present and on our own
team because those are the moments we
most naturally want to split off from
ourselves to tell ourselves the story
the way you're feeling is not okay ergo
it is my false self's job to rush in and
save the day we need to be patient with
ourselves and teach ourselves now we are
adults and these difficult emotions that
come up I can handle maybe my parent did
not do the best job at staying present
with me in moments where they were
feeling shame
or when I was feeling shame and
expressing it to them even if that was
not their intention maybe they learned
that because they were raised that way
but when we don't have ourselves
mirrored back to ourselves in those key
moments early on we learn to detach from
ourselves in those moments as adults
so the final step in this process is
learning to stop detaching from
ourselves in the moments where we would
otherwise split off
if I have an awkward interaction and I
feel overwhelmed with shame if something
happens between myself and someone I
care about and I suddenly feel really
angry if I make a mistake and I feel
overrun with guilt and like I want to
rush out and fond to repair the
situation those are the moments I need
myself the most to be present with me to
learn how to tolerate those emotional
experiences without immediately rushing
in to fix them and to extract the
lessons that can be learned from those
emotions and to allow myself to develop
a greater understanding of what my
feelings are telling me this is how we
build our authentic selves into very
wise and caring people who have
emotional discernment and that emotional
discernment is an upward spiral because
it allows us to stay present and engaged
enough to tell what feels right for us
what we feel aligned with and what feels
wrong for us or like it's not for us and
the more that we are present with
ourselves and other people and can
recognize the feeling of yes this is for
me or no this is not for me in the
moment
the better we get at making decisions
about which types of situations it is
wise and healthy and growing for us to
place ourselves in and the more we place
ourselves in environments where it is a
wise healthy and growing opportunity for
our authentic selves to engage with the
stronger that self-relationship grows
and the more we are able to show up as
the person we actually are so the
wonderful thing about all of this is
that it is a process that builds on
itself
and I want to be clear it takes time
it's not overnight and a big part of the
process is making mistakes along the way
and not kicking ourselves off of our own
team when we make those mistakes but
being the wise inner parents we need for
ourselves and going those mistakes are
part of the learning process they are
important and if we can be present with
them they are an opportunity to do
something differently and learn in
places where we once dissociated and
then repeated the same mistakes over and
over it sounds very corny but if you can
get to the place where you truly mess
something up and do something wrong and
go this is an opportunity I am thankful
for to pattern interrupt myself and
change the way that I'm approaching this
situation you learn that there's not
that much to fear when it comes to
making mistakes which means you can take
more risks and get more out of your life
which is an awesome outcome to
eventually arrive at all right I think
that is all I have to say for today on
this topic though honestly I could talk
about it forever as always let me know
what's coming up for you guys I love you
all I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other and your
authentic inner children and I will see
you back here again really soon
foreign
[Music]