hey guys heidi preeb here earlier this
week on this channel we talked about
what to do if you can't afford therapy
or what resources you can draw on if for
whatever reason therapy is not
accessible to you today i wanted to make
a follow-up video for those of you who
are looking to start a therapy journey
and who don't necessarily know where to
start or how to find a therapist that
fits for you so the first time i ever
went to a therapist i was 15 years old
and i went to a therapist who was kind
of the only one available through my
parents insurance and i had no rapport
with this person i felt like they didn't
get me they weren't specialized in the
area that i needed help with and it just
absolutely flopped and i had this
experience two more times in my 20s i
went to see therapists for periods of
six months and learned
next to nothing from the experiences one
i got a little bit more out of than the
other but at the end of the day i felt
like the help that i was getting was not
the help i needed it was the help that
was most accessible to me at that time
so it was the cheapest help the most
readily available help but at the end of
the day i did end up feeling like i had
kind of flushed some money down the
toilet and this wasn't all the
therapists fault i was also at a point
where i wasn't quite ready to engage
honestly with therapy and in my other
video on therapy inaccessibility we talk
about that as a factor that might get in
the way of you accessing therapy and
there's a lot of work you can do around
reading yourself if you feel like you
might someday want therapy but know that
right now you're not quite ready to take
that leap but all that being said at
this point in my life i have a fantastic
therapist who i benefit immensely
through working with and i really
believe that that experience is possible
for anyone who's able to access therapy
if you know how to find the right
therapist so today we're going to talk
about how to do that something i think
we don't acknowledge enough is the fact
that there are a lot of bad therapists
out there just like there are people in
every single profession who are just not
that skilled at their job there are many
therapists who for whatever reason are
not that skilled at therapy or perhaps
they're going through a season of their
life where they're very burnt out
they're not able to show up to the
extent that they should be able to show
up for their clients and it's really
important to note that if therapy is not
working for you but you feel like you
are truly bringing your all to it it
might be that you have the wrong
therapist and that it's time to look for
a new one so
the number one piece of advice that i
always give people is get the research
phase right so be as specific as
possible about which issues you really
want to tackle and work through and then
find a therapist who is doing research
or actively putting out consistent
information related to that field
whether that means they have a youtube
channel or a blog or some other way of
getting information out into the world
and the reason that i recommend this is
because that shows that they are
actively engaged with their own material
so just like any other profession
therapy can become just another nine to
five job for people there are some
therapists out there who get educated
one time and then they practice therapy
without ever really staying that up to
date on the new information but just
like in any field there are also people
who are in it for the absolute love of
it and who are consistently learning and
reading and trying to gain more and more
information about their own field
because they truly want to get down to
the bottom of it they are inherently
engaged in the mysteries that they are
tackling in their work and that is the
kind of therapist you want you want a
therapist who is naturally and
intrinsically
motivated to understand the human mind
so the two times in my life that i've
ever found good therapists one i saw for
three sessions when i was 25 and was
like that's all you need with therapy
right three sessions um but he was
fantastic and the therapist that i have
been with for a while now is absolutely
fantastic as well and both of them i
found by looking for people who were
actively putting out resources related
to the problems that i was facing so the
first therapist i ever found who worked
out really well for me i found a
research paper that he had published on
the specific topic that i was struggling
with and then i contacted him and just
asked hey do you do therapy do you see
clients it so happened that he did the
therapist i have now i found through
blog articles and i found this person's
writing to be very engaging very
accessible and also i learned quite a
bit through reading it so once again i
contacted them to see if they took on
clients got put on a waitlist for a
little while figured it was worth it
because i really felt like i wanted to
learn from this person and ended up
benefiting immensely through their help
and i continue to benefit so this is
kind of the number one thing that i
consider to be a therapy hack find
someone whose research or whose
knowledge base you already connect with
before you even meet them and there's a
very high chance that you're going to
connect with them as a person as well
because again if they can communicate
through writing or through videos or
whatever it is in a way that really
speaks to you chances are that means
that you're going to relate to them as a
human being as well and again if they're
putting out that stuff it means there's
a higher chance that they are really
invested and really knowledgeable and
really interested in continuing their
own development as a therapist so tip
number one start with the research or
resources that you find helpful and then
figure out who the people behind them
are and see whether those people take
clients
tip number two is know how to interview
your therapists so i always recommend
that people go to two to five
consultations at least with different
therapists before deciding on who they
want to work with and a lot of people
are very nervous about saying no they
don't want to turn therapists down but
therapists understand more than anybody
else or at least they should understand
more than anybody else that client
therapist fit is incredibly important
and they probably don't want to work
with a client who feels like they're a
bad fit for them right so don't worry
about hurt feelings in this process have
consultation calls with as many
therapists as you feel like you need to
most of them will offer 20 or 30 minute
calls just to see if you're the right
fit for each other and you need to be
using that time to ask them the
questions that you really need answered
so your goal within this consultation
session is to make sure that they're
going to be able to help you with the
things that you need help with so a lot
of the time people will go to let's say
a site like psychology today which can
be a great resource for finding
different therapists but the therapist
will have like 20 different modalities
listed so let's say you really want to
find a therapist who works with
attachment styles most therapists will
actually have that listed but whether or
not that means that they have a deep
understanding of attachment styles and
how it shows up for people is something
else entirely it could mean they took
one class on at one time and have only a
base level understanding of it and the
same is true for most things that are
listed so you have to figure out within
this consultation call is this therapist
actually extremely well informed in the
area that i want to do work on or is it
just something that they know a little
bit about and that they might integrate
into whatever their primary form of
therapy is so it's not only okay but i
highly encourage you to directly ask the
therapist that you're speaking with i am
mostly looking to work on this one thing
is that something you specialize in or
what's your background in that area you
can also ask for clarification about
some of the language that they might
have put on their profile so if they put
that they are trauma informed you can
ask them what does that mean to you pure
knowledge is not the most important
thing when it comes to finding a
therapist i think that fit is the most
important thing and we're going to talk
about fit shortly but having a wide
knowledge base in the particular area
that you want to work on is probably the
second most important thing because you
want someone who doesn't just have an
understanding of what it is that you
want to work on you want someone who can
catch you in all of your bs around it
and in order to catch someone in their
bs you have to know a lot about how the
system works so knowing what anxious
avoidant and fearful avoidant attachment
styles are is very different than for
example knowing how to show up as a
therapist when working with a dismissive
avoidant client versus an anxious
preoccupied client because the way that
you are going to need to show up in
those therapeutic relationships are
going to need to be specifically catered
to those styles it also means you're
going to need an awareness of your own
attachment style and how that might bias
you now that's an example for if you're
looking for an attachment-based
therapist but let's say you're looking
for a trauma-based therapist again a
therapist who knows about trauma is
different than a therapist who
specializes in trauma and is able to
identify when you're having a trigger
when you're in an emotional flashback
which of the presenting problems that
you're bringing into therapy are
actually just a symptom of a deeper
trauma response so there are going to be
blind spots for therapists who are
informed but not entrenched in the thing
that you need to work on so you want to
try to find a therapist who is as much
as possible entrenched in the field that
you need help with because they're going
to have more of a 360 degree view on
that topic and that's what you're
looking for another thing that is
totally okay during a therapy interview
is to ask them about allyship so if you
are a person of color if you are queer
or not cisgendered it's totally okay to
ask what does being an ally mean to you
and if they are a person who has done a
lot of work in this area and really
taken the time to dedicate themselves to
understanding which issues their clients
might be facing that they don't
necessarily face as a person who is not
a part of that group they will be able
to answer that question for you and if
they can't answer it in a way that you
feel is satisfactory it probably means
they're not the best person for you to
work with and that's okay you should be
working with someone who's going to be
able to understand the context in which
you are showing up in the world that's
really important and it's also more than
okay to try to seek out a therapist who
is a part of the same groups that you're
a part of so they already understand
some of the unique challenges that
you're facing in the world it's also
okay if let's say you have religious
trauma to ask your therapist whether
they identify with a particular religion
i don't think they have to answer that
legally but if they're willing to that
can give you a lot of information about
whether or not that's someone who maybe
you're gonna feel safe with so i think
that a lot of people shy away from these
really hard questions during therapeutic
interviews and again your therapist
doesn't necessarily have to answer all
of these things but do you want to work
with someone who isn't comfortable going
there
maybe you don't right so you move on
with your interviewing process
third thing to look for in a therapist
and in my opinion this is absolutely the
most important is having rapport with
them as a human being so i think that a
lot of people have this vision in their
heads of therapy is a purely
transactional experience where you go to
someone who has knowledge kind of like
you go to a doctor and they tell you the
knowledge and then you get better from
taking their advice but that's really
not what therapy is therapy is a
relationship with another human being
and a lot of what makes it so powerful
is that we are rewiring the way that we
relate to someone through having a very
healthy experience with a therapist so
if you are trying to rewire the way that
you relate to other human beings through
a relationship with someone who you
don't naturally get along with very well
that is probably not going to give you
the results that you're looking for so
early on in my therapy journey the way i
ended up wasting six months of therapy
at one point was by finding a therapist
who was kind of the opposite of me
because i thought well i want to
cultivate these traits in myself that
are kind of the opposite of who i am now
so i'm going to find a therapist who
embodies all of those qualities and then
i'm going to hope that they get
transmuted into my brain and what ended
up happening is that i had a therapist
who just didn't really understand the
way that i was naturally wired and there
was absolutely nothing wrong with this
therapist i actually think she would
have been a fantastic therapist for
someone else but because all of my work
with her was me kind of fighting against
my natural tendencies rather than
working with someone who understood my
natural tendencies and could help me
work with them holistically i got
absolutely nowhere in that therapy just
wasted my own time and money and now
looking back it is so clear to me that
you are supposed to have a
human-to-human connection with your
therapist you are supposed to sit in a
room with them or sit with them on zoom
and just feel like this is a human being
who i point blank enjoy the company of
so think of the qualities that anyone
who you would both look up to and feel
connected to would have and search for
those in a therapist like i know that
for myself i feel very connected to
people who are very analytical because
i'm very analytical who have a sense of
humor because i have a sense of humor
and i process a lot in my life through
that sense of humor for me personally i
also struggle with authorities who are
kind of a blank slate that makes me
really uncomfortable so i need a
therapist who talks a little bit more
who is a little bit more open about who
they are as a human being behind their
professional veneer and of course there
are professional boundaries that a
therapist needs to have in place but you
also have to know your preference for
like therapists who talks a little bit
more or a little bit less therapists
who's a little bit more formal or a
little bit more informal and for a lot
of people this is just similar to how
they pick people to be friends with to
spend their time with outside of therapy
right therapists are people they have
personalities right we talk a lot on
this channel about personality figure
out which personality traits make you
feel comfortable opening up to someone
and look for those traits in your
therapist as a human being because at
the end of the day someone can have all
of the knowledge on earth but if you do
not have a human to human connection
with them that knowledge is not going to
impact you the way that it otherwise
could because maybe you're just going to
feel like you're being lectured to right
therapy is about healing through
relationship so you need to find a
therapist that you feel comfortable in
relationship with
and you have to trust your gut here you
just have to there's no other way about
it if you're sitting in front of a
therapist
and they're saying all the right things
they're answering all of your questions
in the interview with the exact answer
you want to hear and yet something in
your gut is just telling you i don't
really feel like this is someone that i
can learn from and grow with listen to
your gut keep interviewing keep looking
for people you will find a therapist
somewhere along the way who you have a
natural sense of rapport with and of
course this doesn't mean that right away
everything is going to be perfect like
any relationship it takes a long time
for your therapist to get to know you
and for you to get comfortable with them
but just like when you're meeting people
out in the wild out in your everyday
life you tend to get a pretty quick
sense of who's a person you could
connect with and who's a person you're
probably not going to connect with you
are going to feel that same sense when
you're interviewing therapists trust it
trust it that is the number one piece of
advice i can give you finding the right
fit in terms of therapists is absolutely
everything it is probably going to be
the single most important factor in
whether or not the therapy ends up
working for you your therapist has to
have the specific kind of intelligence
that you need in order to get better
right so in the process of picking a
therapist who's going to be really
helpful for you my three recommendations
are do your research ask the hard and
direct questions and really tune into
how you feel when you're speaking with
them and make sure that rapport is
really there for you if you can get
those things right you have laid down a
really solid foundation for yourself
that you can now start building on
through your work in therapy all right
that's all i have to say for today but
as always if you have any tips on how to
find a great therapist or if you have
any advice to share on what worked for
you
please leave it in the comments i love
when you guys share resources with each
other because that is how so many of us
learn so please let me know your
thoughts and any advice you have about
how to find a good therapist below and
in the meantime i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourselves and i
will see you back here again soon
[Music]