hey guys heidi preeve here today i
wanted to talk about something that
isn't a complaint so to speak in the
type community but that i've heard some
people comment that they wish there was
more content around so with the
enneagram of personality which is a
personality system that a lot of people
love and ascribe to there are levels of
health within each type so what that
means is that if you are a type one you
will get a description not just of your
personality on a regular basis but also
what it looks like when you are super
healthy and kind of killing it at being
yourself versus what it looks like when
you are doing a very crappy job of being
yourself i don't know there's probably a
better way to phrase that but that's
what i'm going with um when your worst
traits are coming out and when you are
unable to compensate for your weaknesses
so to speak so
is there a similar thing in myers-briggs
is a question that a lot of people have
asked that a lot of awesome discussions
have centered around and unofficially we
can kind of look at each type through
the lens of unhealthy versus healthier
expressions of type so for the purpose
of this video i'm gonna define unhealthy
as when you are operating from a place
that goes against your natural energy
and gives you results that you don't
want in your life okay all of us do this
there is nothing inherently bad or
shameful about being in a place where
you're working against your natural
energy it just probably isn't gonna feel
very good right and then on the flip
side of that i'll define healthy as when
you are working with your natural energy
and getting lots of results that you
want out of life and obviously this is
going to look completely different for
each type in fact to many types when
they're at their absolute worst or least
healthiest are functioning kind of like
a different type at average health so
for example an enfp who is not doing so
well in life and who is really
struggling might look more like an istj
in terms of the actions that they're
taking however in istj taking those
exact same actions might be functioning
really really well and be feeling quite
happy with their life because once again
type is all about your energy when we're
working with our energy and getting the
results that we want out of life we tend
to be pretty happy and healthy and when
we are doing the opposite we tend to be
pretty unhappy and unhealthy so what
does this look like for the enfp okay so
i want to talk about four different kind
of dimensions that the enfp can fall on
and there are endless dimensions like
these these are just the four that i
have noticed pop up over and over again
in my own life as well as in the lives
of enfps that i know so the first
dimension of unhealthy to healthy that i
would encourage all enfps to consider
their own lives through the lens of is
the continuum of living in victim mode
versus living in creator mode so if you
have watched any of my videos on the
drama triangle you know that living in
victim mode means when you feel like the
world is kind of against you and you are
constantly just reacting to things that
you feel like are happening to you but
you aren't necessarily proactively
taking control of your life and when
you're living in creator mode which is a
term that comes from the empowerment
dynamic you are happening to your life
so you are looking around and going no
matter what resources i have available
to me no matter what's going on outside
of me no matter what challenges i'm up
against how can i live in a creative way
that allows me to get results that i
want that might be a little bit outside
of the box right and enfps when they are
healthy and when they are working with
their natural energy are incredible at
working outside of the box and getting
incredibly creative and astonishing
results from their life however why do
we fall into victim mode when we are
unhealthy i think that this is actually
a state that isn't very natural for the
enfp but can come about when we start to
feel isolated the way the world is
designed is not necessarily set up for
enfps and that can make us feel very
victimized when we grow up and start
trying to follow someone else's path and
then become increasingly depressed and
increasingly stressed out when we
realize i'm not getting the results that
i want out of life i don't feel inspired
and alive and like i am excited to wake
up in the mornings and it can be easy to
feel a little bit victimized by that it
can also feel very isolating to feel
like we're not meeting a lot of people
who are very similar to us or who share
our values or our dreams or the way that
we think and that can become a
self-fulfilling prophecy because the
more we believe that nobody is ever
going to understand us the more we hide
ourselves away and the more we hide
ourselves away the less connections we
make and so when we are focusing on how
different we are and how misunderstood
we are we are living in victim mode and
the way to step out of victim mode into
creator mode is to look at how we can
get more of the thing that we are
currently missing in our lives so i
remember in like my early 20s i started
feeling like where are all the other
people like me like i am not happy
working my nine to five i'm not happy
with many of the relationships that i
have at this point in my life and i
realized that the people who are like me
were all out in the world doing all the
that i didn't have the balls to do
because i was at home playing it safe
and so i started living nomadically i
got a remote job i started traveling
full-time and i started meeting so many
other perceivers and my life up until
this point had been a lot of judgers and
there is nothing wrong with being a
judger i have judger friends and family
who i love with my whole entire heart
and who i learn so much from but no one
makes me feel quite as not crazy as
other perceivers when i'm in the company
of a whole bunch of other p's i just
feel like i'm understood my energy
matches these people's energy and when i
started traveling all the time my life
became full of perceivers and that was
me stepping into creator mode i looked
at my problem and i thought how can i be
creative about sourcing the solution
right
and now at this point in my life i'm
kind of going through this process all
over again because i spent so long
traveling and partying and having good
times that i neglected to nurture
relationships that were deeper and so
now i'm wondering and i'm asking myself
the question how do i find people who
want to go deeper who want to have more
intellectual connections who are a lot
more emotionally available and ready to
talk about difficult topics and once
again i'm learning i have to be the one
who puts myself out there first i have
to be the one who shows up honestly and
authentically and who doesn't make a
joke out of everything and eventually
people who are living in the same way
will find me and i will find them
because neither of us are wearing a mask
right
so when you step out of victim mode as
an enfp and into creator mode you're
taking responsibility for the life that
you want and the results that you want
out of your life and you are finding
creative solutions to the problems that
you're facing that currently stand in
the way of you getting what you want so
an unhealthy enfp is living in victim
mode feeling like everything is
happening to them and a healthy enfp is
living in creator mode making amazing
things happen with their life dimension
number two that i want to talk about
when it comes to the health or
unhealthiness of an enfp is whether they
are running away from discomfort or
towards their purpose so you are an e
and a p and that means that no your life
is not going to have a singular purpose
right there's that phrase like
multi-potential light that i think a lot
of any doms in particular relate to by
the way if you don't know what i'm
talking about when i say things like
n-e-f-i-t-e or s-i i'm talking about the
enfp's cognitive functions which are the
modes of processing that we prefer
inside of our minds as enfps if you want
to learn more about your cognitive
makeup as an enfp i do run a six-week
enfp soul bootcamp online course where i
use the cognitive functions as little
characters kind of like the movie inside
out to show you what's going on inside
of your brain and to break down the way
that you process information make
decisions understand your emotions and
manage your own health and wellness and
we talk about how to do all of that in a
way that works with your natural energy
rather than against it so you can check
that out on my website at
www.heidipreeb.com
and the link is in the description to
this video so a lot of us who lead with
extroverted intuition feel like we have
many different life purposes and at
different points in our lives we will be
pursuing different things and that's
totally okay however there are also
points in our lives where we are not
purposefully moving in any direction we
are just trying to avoid pain or
discomfort
now enfps are known for being very
optimistic very positive very upbeat and
a lot of that is true and those are
wonderful qualities that i would never
want you to lose however if we leave our
positivity and our bubbly natures
unchecked they can lead into compulsive
avoidance of anything that feels
uncomfortable and that is definitely not
a place we want to end up in when we are
in that place we end up just chasing
highs endlessly in our lives without
ever getting a real deep and pervasive
sense of satisfaction or meaning out of
our lives because we aren't taking the
time to carefully cultivate the areas of
our lives that might feel a little bit
difficult or discomforting to grow
through right all of the best things in
life whether they are business ventures
whether they are relationships with
people whether they are adventures or
experiences that we have require a
little bit of discomfort at some point
and what is so ironic about enfps not
wanting to sit with that discomfort is
that when we are at our healthiest it's
actually one of the things that we are
the best at right so the reason that
enfps makes such inspiring speakers and
writers and leaders is because they are
so adept at observing their emotional
experiences and encouraging people to
persevere through difficulty right
an enfp who has actualized their ability
to sit with difficult emotions and
persevere towards the things that they
want out of life even in the face of
those difficult emotions is one of the
most self-actualized people you will
ever meet and that's why we tend to see
so much creativity and ambition within
this type but in order to actualize
those things you have to be willing to
stay with things when they're
uncomfortable
if you know that you want what's on the
other side of that discomfort right i'm
all about letting go of the parts of our
lives that we honestly just don't want
but if you know that you want something
if you know that you feel aligned with
something that there is something you
are meant to create or explore or learn
about or do
you owe it to yourself to be sticking
through any moments of discomfort that
arise along the way to that thing and
you don't have to be cruel to yourself
in the process you don't have to beat
yourself up in the process you just have
to be willing to commit to it the
non-committal enfp is a lot of fun but
the enfp who is committed to something
they really care about in life is one of
the most incredible and inspiring people
you will ever meet you owe it to
yourself to fight your way into that
person we both know it's in you
unhealthy versus healthy scale number
three is the scale from selectively
honest to radically transparent so now
we're going to start talking about your
introverted feeling function so
enfps are very deeply emotive people we
feel our feelings very deeply and we are
aware of our emotions to a much greater
extent than a lot of other types
whatever your second cognitive function
is is the function that you kind of
observe so you have a little bit of
distance from it and so you often have a
really great perspective on how it
operates and this is enfps with
introverted feeling we're in our
feelings but not so much that they
completely take us over and we lose
perspective on them we can but not as a
rule and this gives us the incredible
opportunity to develop a profound sense
of self-awareness and the healthy enfp
is comfortable looking at all different
parts of their personality the good the
bad the ugly the terrifying the exciting
everything
and being honest with other people about
their motivations their desires their
fears their hopes
but
it is a very scary and vulnerable thing
to do that and to share yourself in that
way right
so a lot of us as enfps for much of our
lives especially if we feel
misunderstood or alone will be
selectively honest so we kind of learn
what we think other people want from us
what is going to go over the best in a
crowd what we think is going to make
someone like us and we only show those
parts of our personality now everyone
does this to some extent right it is
human nature to wear masks sometimes
however what's a bit more unique to
enfps or maybe just to nf types in
general is that we are so hyper aware of
the masks that we're wearing right a lot
of people wear masks and don't even
notice it it's largely unconscious for
them but because it is so conscious to
us we owe it to ourselves to start to
examine that and figure out where and
when and why am i wearing these masks
where and when and why does it not feel
authentic to me and how can i live in a
more transparent way the reason you want
to start living in a more transparent
way is because it is going to be
phenomenally healing for your mental
health i am a die-hard firm believer
that we are as sick as our secrets and
the more that we are lying to ourselves
or other people the more that we are
hiding ourselves from ourselves or other
people the more that we are getting what
we want through manipulation rather than
direct and compassionate communication
the more we are going to suffer
physically mentally and emotionally and
everyone always kind of freaks out when
i use the word enfp manipulative in the
same sentence every type manipulates
okay so let's get that off the board
right away this is not about you being
more manipulative than other types this
is about you having the capacity perhaps
more so than some other types to realize
when you're being manipulative because
you have that capacity for extreme
self-awareness right so you more so than
other types might have the ability to
catch yourself in these moments when you
are portraying a not completely honest
or transparent version of yourself and
start communicating more authentically
more truthfully and more directly and
the thing that is really cool about this
is that that is probably the quickest
way to earn other people's trust anyway
yes showing up as your authentic self is
going to drive away people who are
freaked out by authenticity and when i
say authenticity i don't mean making
other people uncomfortable with your
truth i just mean stating honestly and
with as much regulation and groundedness
as possible the truth about what's going
on for you in any given moment this
doesn't mean you have to be rude it
doesn't mean you have to be harsh it
doesn't mean that you are trying not to
make other people comfortable i'll make
maybe another video on being authentic
without being off-putting but what i'm
mostly encouraging here is stop catering
your personality to other people and
start worrying about how to communicate
who you actually are to other people
because at the end of the day everybody
is always going to get more benefit out
of authentic self-expression then
they're going to out of someone people
pleasing them right when someone's a
people pleaser or when someone is very
obviously wearing a social mask it just
makes the other person feel
uncomfortable anyways right like no one
wants to be around someone who's not
being their true selves because they're
kind of communicating to you subtly i
don't want you to be your true self
either right the power of introverted
feeling is the power of showing up as
you actually are and giving other people
permission to do the same thing and
healthy enfps do this exceptionally well
and the last scale that i want to tend
to here when we talk about unhealthy
versus healthy enfps and again this is
far from the true last scale but it's
the last one we're going to talk about
today is compartmentalizing your
well-being versus dealing with your
health in a holistic way and this is one
that i think is so common to younger
enfps so enfps who have not yet learned
that they need to operate differently
than the people around them because the
way that their energy is oriented is
just different from the norm so i see a
lot of young enfps thinking that they
have one of two options right they can
either become incredibly regimented and
kind of make their life very small and
controlled and do certain routines over
and over and over again in order to get
them money or health or whatever it is
that they feel like is going to be
responsible for them to do
or they can be free and live in a way
that is fun and exciting and that is
aligned with their natural energy but as
a consequence of that they are going to
have to be in financial ruin or
constantly struggle in relationships or
never be completely understood by other
people and this is absolutely a false
dichotomy okay you do not have to be
regimented stuck in your ways and doing
things the way that an stj type would in
order to be healthy you also do not have
to be living in a way that is completely
irresponsible in order to be happy so
you can drop this mindset of i will
suffer now in order to be happy later
and start asking yourself how can i be
happy without suffering because that is
possible believe it or not and this is
going to require some integration of the
inferior function which for enfps is
introverted sensing it is the part of
you that secretly kind of loves routines
and balance and doing the same thing
over and over and over again and you
like to do this generally for a short
period of time then you get bored of it
and want excitement again but if you can
learn to integrate routines into your
life in a way that actually keeps you
balanced while you are exploring and
grasping onto new opportunities you are
going to be able to live that way
forever and that is how it should be you
are built to be excited and exploring
and learning until the day you die and
you should not have to take a single
break from that in less and until you
want to and i wholeheartedly believe
that that is possible for you anywhere
where we are compromising our well-being
or where we are lying to ourselves about
what makes us happy is going to impact
our overall health and happiness it just
is there's no getting away from that we
cannot compartmentalize as well as it
feels like we can compartmentalize okay
so if you are living in a very
adventurous way but you feel super
unhealthy or super freaked out about
your future that is already impeding
upon your happiness it's not that later
that's going to become a problem it's a
problem now if it's causing you
consistent stress so you need to find a
way to deal with those things in order
to get the most out of whatever you're
doing in life right and the same goes if
you're living in the opposite extreme if
you are limiting the things that you do
and promising yourself happiness and joy
later you are murdering your soul in the
process because you are allowing
yourself to forget the things that make
you feel energized and excited and that
give you the energy to go for what you
want in the first place right you have
to start looking at yourself as a whole
person not as a series of kind of
compartmentalized people some of whom
are responsible and some of whom are
really wild and crazy these are all the
same people they all live inside of you
and you have to find a way to balance
these energies if you ever want to be
happy in a sustainable long lasting way
so that means being very accepting of
all of the different parts of you as you
should be because there is absolutely
nothing wrong with any of them they just
might need a little bit of integration
all right i think that's all i have to
say for today once again if you're
interested in learning more about your
personality type as an enfp check out my
website at www.heidiprev.com
the link is in this description and
until next time i love you guys i hope
you're taking care of yourselves i hope
you are working with yourselves as much
as humanly possible rather than against
yourselves and i will see you back here
again soon
[Music]